Title: From Pixels to Concepts: Growing Rich 3D Semantic Scene Graph Forests utilizing Foundation Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.23312v1

Published Time: Tue, 23 Jun 2026 03:41:29 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# From Pixels to Concepts: Growing Rich 3D Semantic Scene Graph Forests utilizing Foundation Models 

David Oberacker 1 Meike Deitersen 1 Niklas Spielbauer 1 Tristan Schnell 1 Georg Heppner 1 Arne Roennau 1,2 

Abstract — Operating in complex real-world environments requires robots to understand their surroundings on a func-tional semantic level. This demands a detailed multi-layer world model capturing the complex relations of the robot’s surroundings. Hierarchical 3D scene graphs address this chal-lenge by integrating geometric, semantic, and relational data within a unified spatial framework. However, current 3D scene graph approaches often restrict themselves to rigid struc-tures of predetermined relationship classes, mostly neglecting important semantic connections, like causal connections or environmental contexts. This paper explores the potential of foundation models to build forests of 3D scene graphs with open semantic relationships to improve scene understanding and robotic task execution. We propose a method where instance-specific concept nodes and relationships are first identified by a VLM and extended upon by an LLM, inferring broader, more abstract concept nodes and relationships through reasoning. These object nodes, concept nodes, and relationships are then assembled into a forest of hierarchical 3D scene graphs, enhanced with concept nodes to represent abstract concepts. Evaluations were conducted on the uHumans2 and ScanNet indoor datasets, validating the accuracy and relevance of the generated relationships. Downstream suitability of scene-graph forests for robotics applications is demonstrated in an open-vocabulary object-retrieval task utilizing both ScanNet data and a real-world indoor deployment using a Boston Dynamics Spot. This paper leverages foundation models to create more expressive, semantically deep 3D hierarchical scene graphs and demonstrates their potential to advance semantic and environmental understanding in robotics. 

©2026 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. 

I. INTRODUCTION Information is the foundation of any meaningful interac-tion or problem-solving. We as humans continuously and subconsciously observe our environment, gathering semantic information such as objects or possible affordances. This continuously updated model of our environment allows us to solve novel tasks faster as we are already primed with an encompassing context of our surroundings. With mobile robots becoming more suitable for applications in human-centered environments, a similar need for a semantically deep and context-rich model of the environment arises. Semantic 3D scene graphs have established themselves as  

> 1

David Oberacker, Meike Deitersen, Niklas Spielbauer, Tristan Schnell, Georg Heppner, and Arne Roennau are with the FZI Research Center for In-formation Technology, 76131 Karlsruhe, Germany. oberacker@fzi.de  

> 2

Arne Roennau is with the Machine Intelligence and Robotics Lab (MaiRo), Karlsruhe Institute for Technology (KIT), Karlsruhe, Germany. The research leading to these results has received funding in the ROB-DEKON II project under the grant agreement No. 13N16540 by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) and the AIDeCo project, which is supported by donations from the Intel Corporation. 

Fig. 1. Generated scene graph from the real-world deployment on a BostonDynamics Spot robot together with the 3D voxel map. Detected objects are represented with their bounding boxes (green). Above the object nodes, the hierarchy of concept-nodes is shown. 

a powerful method for modeling environments [1], [2], [3]. While spatial representation and semantic understand-ing have been highly relevant topics for many years, the recent advances in embodied AI have drastically altered the requirements for semantic environment representations. Especially the rigid, manually crafted ontologies underlying many earlier 3D scene graph perception approaches [2], [4], [5] are unsuitable to model the complex interactions modern robots are expected to perform. To this end, research on open-concept and open-vocabulary 3D scene graph generation has become a major focus [3], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11]. Approaches like ConceptGraphs [8] utilize open-vocabulary segmentation to detect objects in RGB-D images as nodes for the scene graph. Pairwise edges between these nodes are then proposed by a Vision Language Model (VLM) given each object’s 2D pose and vision mask. Similarly, Open3DSG [6] generates scene graphs directly from point cloud information utilizing a graph neural network and CLIP [12]. Whereas the aforementioned approaches focus mostly on spatial relation-ships, Zhang et al. [13] aim at identifying functional relation-ships, namely affordances, between object pairs. Opposed to earlier approaches, the majority of open-vocabulary systems forgo hierarchical structure in favor of denser graphs. Utilizing the strong contextual knowledge of Large Lan-guage Models (LLMs) has proven to provide significant benefits for generating open-vocabulary 3D scene graphs [6], [10], [13], [14], [15]. When looking at the larger problem 

> arXiv:2606.23312v1 [cs.RO] 22 Jun 2026

of generating encompassing environment models that are suitable for use in complex multi-step tasks, some open issues remain. First, current approaches often restrict themselves to singular relationship types (affordances, spatial), while utilizing open-vocabulary node and edge labels. A second open question is multi-level hierarchies, where more than just pairwise connections between object nodes are proposed. Both are required to provide the robot with similar informa-tion depth as a human would acquire naturally. This work provides an approach for building a set of hi-erarchical 3D scene graphs in parallel, representing different relationship types and concept levels.  

> •

We introduce an approach for building an information-dense forest of 3D Hierarchical Semantic Scene Graph (3D-HSSG) (see Fig. 1), where semantically disjunct concept layers provide semantic abstractions above a common object node layer, grounded in the scene.  

> •

We propose a method to generate the aforesaid forests in a fully open-vocabulary manner by iteratively utilizing LLMs and VLMs with strong self-validation to gen-erate new nodes and edges based on perceived objects and previously generated contextual nodes in the scene graph.  

> •

We provide a comprehensive evaluation of the generated relation quality, validating the accuracy and consis-tency of the relations and concept nodes produced by our approach.  

> •

We demonstrate the applicability to downstream robotics tasks for forests of 3D-HSSG by realizing an open-vocabulary object retrieval task in a real-world indoor deployment. First, Section II highlights some related works. In Sec-tion III, we propose the scene graph forest generation method, with the implementation in Section IV. Section V analyzes the quality of generated relations and the down-stream applicability of our approach. Section VI discusses the results, outlining the advantages and limitations of our approach. Lastly, in Section VII, we conclude and give an outlook of future improvements. II. RELATED WORKS 

A. Closed-Vocabulary 3D Scene Graphs 

Initially proposed by Armeni et al. [4] hierarchical 3D scene graphs have been well established to represent a robot’s environment. Approaches like KIMERA by Rosinol et al. [5] have shown that 3D scene graphs are suitable for SLAM applications, including the representation of dynamic agents, like humans or other robots. Both approaches employ a fixed ontology, based on objects (fixed object classes), places, rooms, and buildings, for defin-ing the layers of the scene graph. Similarly, graph-neural-network-based approaches [14], [16], which use trained neu-ral networks to predict 3D scene-graphs from input data, utilize static lexical onologies to organize nodes and edges in the graph. 

B. Open-Vocabulary 3D Scene Graphs 

To address the problem of fixed ontological models when creating scene representations, recent works have shifted towards open-vocabulary approaches for labeling nodes and edges [3], [6], [8], [17], [18]. ConceptGraphs, introduced by Gu et al. [8], utilize streams of RGB-D data to generate 3D scene graphs iteratively. Observed objects are first detected in an input image using an open-vocabulary approach. Afterward, they are associated with the object in the generated scene representation using a feature-level representation. A LLM then generates relation-ships between pairs of objects utilizing label and spatial in-formation from the 3D map. This differs from our approach, as they primarily focus on pairwise semantic connections between objects, whereas we do not consider object-to-object connections, only connections between objects and abstract concepts. Koch et al. [6] propose a learned approach that can predict a static 3D scene graph from point cloud data with both open-vocabulary nodes and edges. During inference, a Graph Neural Network (GNN) produces a 3D graph structure from pointcloud data, where nodes are labeled by comparing the cosine similarity between CLIP [12] embeddings and the node embeddings produced by the GNN. Graph Edges are in turn predicted by combining an LLM and Qformer. One downside of this approach is that nodes in the generated graph structure are always related to objects in the scene; thus, relationships can only be expressed between pairs of objects. Similarly to ConceptGraphs, this differs from our approach, as they focus on pairwise object relations. CLIO [3], proposed by Maggio et al., builds open-set 3D scene graphs on top of the places graph from Hydra [2]. CLIP [12] and Segment Anything [19] are used to mask and identify objects in the scene, with the weighted CLIP feature vector of all nearby objects being assigned to places in the scene graph. Opposed to our approach, CLIO specializes in task-specific querying based on object clusters, not the generation of semantic hierarchies. HOV-SG [17] and OrionNav [18] both focus on creating hierarchical 3D scene graphs for navigation/task planning. In both approaches, feature maps from an open-vocabulary semantic segmentation network are projected into 3D space, and object clusters are determined in 3D. While the nodes and node-level connections are created in an open-vocabulary manner, the hierarchy of scene graph levels is, in contrast to our approach, fixed to a model of objects, places, rooms, and buildings. A recent approach by Zhang et al. [13] extracts 3D Se-mantic Scene Graph (3D-SSG) with functional dependency edge labels between nodes. Instead of describing spatial re-lationships, functional 3D-SSG focus on interactable objects and their causal relationships (e.g. water faucet controls the water flow to the sink). While utilizing similar approaches to edge and node generation to our approach, relying directly on VLM and LLM, they do not consider hierarchical rela-tionships and non-object nodes. Other than the presented state-of-the-art, our approach aims to grow multiple 3D-HSSG with open-vocabulary concepts and organize them in a structured and machine-interpretable manner. III. METHOD By extending the traditional 3D Hierarchical Semantic Scene Graph (3D-HSSG) generation [4], from a singular graph, to a set of multiple graphs, we aim to increase the amount of information that can be encoded in a robot’s environmental model. We propose a forest of 3D-HSSG 

where leaf nodes encode objects grounded in the scene, and inner nodes represent open-vocabulary concepts. Each graph in the forest represents a conceptual hierarchy, where a high-level semantic concept is the root, and each leaf represents an object, and inner nodes represent sub-concepts. Specifically, we define the forest ℱ as: 

ℱ = {(𝒪, 𝒞, ℛ)|𝒪 = object nodes 

𝒞 = concept nodes 

ℛ = relationships }

(1) Object nodes 𝒪 encode physical objects in the scene, and ground the resulting graph in the described environment: 

𝒪 = {(𝑖, 𝑐, 𝑝, ℎ, 𝑤) ∣𝑖 = unique id ,𝑐 = class label ,𝑝 = B.Box Center 6D-Pose ,ℎ = height ,𝑤 = width }

(2) We utilize bounding boxes for spatial grounding in relation to an additional 3D voxel map of the environment. This avoids information duplication between the spatial and semantic models. 𝒞 describes concept nodes, which describe non-embodied concepts within the scene. 

𝒞 = {(𝑙)|𝑙 = concept label } (3) Lastly, ℛ describes the relationships in the graphs. 

ℛ = {(𝑠, 𝑒, 𝑡)|𝑠 ∈ 𝒪 ∪ 𝒞, 𝑒 ∈ 𝒞, 𝑡 = relationship type }

with ∀𝑡 ∶ ℛ + ∩ {(𝑛, 𝑛, 𝑡)|𝑛 ∈ 𝒪 ∪ 𝒞} = ∅ 

(4) Instead of direct relationships between object nodes, we propose an infinite hierarchy of concept nodes, where direct object-to-object relationships can be represented through transitive connections via concept-nodes, e.g., “ doorknob opens door ” can be represented by “ doorknob ” “ provides ”“open ”, and “ door ” “ can be ” “ open ”. While unintuitive, it retains the hierarchical nature of the forest and keeps its graphs cycle-free. Please note that ℱ does not constitute a real forest, only its subset ℱ𝒞 , describing the concept-node-only subset of the graph structure. 

ℱ𝒞 = {(𝒞, ℛ 𝒞 )|ℛ 𝒞 ⊂ ℛ with 

ℛ𝒞 ={𝑟 = (𝑠, 𝑒, 𝑡)|𝑟 ∈ ℛ ∧ 𝑠, 𝑒 ∈ 𝒞}} (5) This is by design, as ℱ𝒞 should describe distinct conceptual structures, whereas the object nodes should connect and ground these distinct structures in the scene. To address the inherent static nature of most current approaches towards open-vocabulary 3D-HSSG, we aim to generate both object nodes 𝒪 and concept nodes 𝒞 fully autonomously using LLM and VLM models. The ability of the system to generate non-embodied nodes promotes the structured connection of concepts. For example, newly introducing different colors as concept nodes and a higher-tier “ color ” concept, a structured search over the entire graph’s objects that emit this property becomes possible. By incrementally extending the concept node trees, we are able to create a context-dense representation of semantic concepts grounded in the scenes and objects, making it suitable for many robotic downstream applications. We propose a multi-step approach to incrementally create the proposed forest of 3D-HSSG from a sequence of RGB-D images and 6D-poses, shown in Fig. 2. The framework can be separated into four distinct parts: the object node extraction, the instance concept-node generation, the meta-level concept-node generation and relationship extraction, and the scene graph assembly. 

A. Object Node Extraction 

First, we detect objects in the current RGB-D image utilizing existing open-vocabulary object detection methods. At this stage, multiple detection methods are possible, given that they output a 6D pose estimate, a class estimate, and can separate instances. For this work, we utilized YOLO-E [20] for this step. Simultaneously, using vdb-mapping a 3D-voxel map [21] is constructed to allow for object tracking in 3D. 6D object poses are estimated by merging overlapping detections based on their bounding box position in the 3D voxel map and the detected class label. Each unique detection class is confirmed by the VLM given its proposed class and detection masks. 

B. Concept Node and Relationship Extraction 

After object detection, we iteratively extract concept nodes and relationships from the uniformly subsampled image stream. As seen in Fig. 2, this happens in two steps: first, concept nodes, directly related to detected object nodes, are constructed to ground the context of the VLM/LLM to the scene in further processing steps. Secondly, higher-level meta concept-nodes are generated based on previously generated concept-nodes. Object-specific attributes are often directly tied to the vi-sual context. Thus, VLMs visual understanding ability makes them well suited for proposing such object-specific attributes, with the main downside being that VLMs are prone to hallucinations. For each frame, the input image, all object detections from the previous step, and the detection masks of objects present in the given input image are provided as inputs to a VLM. It does a zero-shot prediction of attributes it can infer for detections from the image. While we suggest the model only infer information about detections that are Object Node Extraction Concept Node and Relationship Extraction Scene Graph Assembply    

> Compute Server
> RGB-Images + Camera Poses
> Open-Vocabulary Object Detection
> (YOLO-E)
> vdb_mapping
> 3D Voxel Map
> Long-Term Multi-Object Tracker
> Instance Concept Creation
> Meta Concept Creation
> Scene Graph Generation
> Forest of Hierachical 3D Semantic Scene Graph
> Visual Language Model
> (Qwen3-VL)
> Reasoning Large Language Model
> (Qwen3-Coder)
> Fig. 2. High-level overview of our approach for generating a forest of 3D-HSSG from RGB-D data and camera poses using a VLM and LLM. The approach consists of four main stages: (1) Semantic Object Perception; (2) Instance Specific Concept-Node Generation; (3) Meta-Level Concept-Node Generation; and (4) Hierarchical 3D Scene Graph Construction. The dashed line shows the usage of the component’s services.

actually present in the image, we explicitly permit attributes for all detections to be generated, to allow for contextual interpretation, e.g., from the background. Previously gener-ated attributes are also provided in subsequent frames. To guide the generation process towards common attributes, we evaluated the approach with the following relationship types in the prompt: color, material, manipulability, and semantic classes. Others can easily be added at any time through our prompting system. Spatial relations are explicitly ignored as a full 3D voxel map of the environment is created in parallel, which encodes these relationships with lower error thresholds than VLM generated information. In contrast to object-specific attributes, conceptual rela-tionships are more dependent on advanced reasoning abilities and extensive world knowledge. While VLMs provide both, recent reasoning-specialized thinking LLMs have expressed significantly stronger performance in both fields [22]. There-fore, we utilize a LLM for the creation of higher-level context nodes and forgo visual context in this phase (see Fig. 2). For this phase, we also provide some example relationships to the LLM: affordances and categorical relations. 

C. Scene Graph Assembly 

As a last step, the generated relationship triplets (see Eq. (4)) are organized in a set of hierarchical scene graphs. First, all unique nodes are generated from the start and endpoints of the relations (starting with object nodes). Secondly, relations are added sequentially, only if they would not induce a cycle in the graphs; otherwise, they are discarded. Together, the object nodes and concept nodes form a hierarchical structure within the 3D scene graph. No additional rigid structure, such as an ontology, is enforced within the meta-concept layer, allowing for flexibility and ease of maintenance. This approach ensures that the scene graphs can be easily extended with new semantic relationships. IV. IMPLEMENTATION The approach was implemented as part of the Robot Operating System 2 (ROS 2) ecosystem. We utilized the Ultralytics YOLO-E [23] ROS 2 package for object detection and bounding box estimation, due to its high accuracy, open-vocabulary detections and high detection frequency. As a VLM we utilized Qwen3-VL [22] (8B parameters, Instruct) and as a LLM Qwen3 [22] (32B parameters, Think-ing) as a thinking model. The output of all models was post-processed and parsed into relationship triples (see Eq. (4)) utilizing fixed parsing rules. These rules included the re-moval of <think> tokens, or repetitions of the task before answering. The 3D-Voxel map was created using the vdb_mapping 

framework [21]. V. EVALUATION To validate the ability of the approach to generate novel relationships and map out complex connections between grounded object nodes and non-embodied concept nodes, we evaluated the system on the uHumans2 [5] and ScanNet [24] datasets. The downstream task suitability of the approach is validated through an open-vocabulary object retrieval task, evaluated on the ScanNet [24] dataset and a real world scenario with a Boston Dynamics Spot robot. We aim to address the following research questions: 1) How accurately does the approach extract and generate semantic relationships? 2) How suitable are the forest of 3D-HSSG for usage in downstream robotic tasks? 

A. Generation of 3D-HSSG forests 

First, we investigated the approach’s ability to generate open-vocabulary relationships. We selected the apartment en-vironment from the uHumans2 [5] and a small one-bedroom apartment from the ScanNet [24] dataset as they present cluttered, human-centered environments with a significant number of possible semantically-relevant relationships. Each dataset was processed in three runs to ensure repeatability. Given the open-vocabulary nature of the generated relation-ships and concept nodes, a human-in-the-loop validation was utilized to categorize generated information as correct or incorrect, given the context of the scene. Fig. 3 shows the custom-developed user interface for this purpose. During the Fig. 3. For evaluation, a Jupyter notebook-based user interface is used to manually evaluate generated concept-nodes and relationships. On the left, the image frame and generated relationship are displayed; the operator classifies them as correct or incorrect. TABLE I MEAN AND STANDARD DEVIATION OF RELATIONSHIPS GENERATED, CORRECT RELATIONSHIPS, AND ACCURACY (%) PER CONFIGURATION AND DATASET ACROSS INDIVIDUAL RUNS. ”OVERALL” ROWS REPRESENT AGGREGATED RESULTS ACROSS BOTH DATASETS, WITH STATISTICS COMPUTED OVER ALL RUNS.                               

> Dataset #Relationships Generated # Correct Relationships Accuracy (%)
> uHumans2 396.3 ± 9.2 261.7 ± 6.4 66.0 ± 0.1
> ScanNet 529.3 ± 168.3 290.7 ± 47.4 56.8 ± 10.3
> Overall 462.8 ± 129.1 276.2 ± 34.2 61 .4±8.2Relation
> has class 228 ± 0.0 228 ± 0.0 100.00 ± 0.0
> manipulable by 1002 ± 5.2 732 ± 1.7 73.1 ± 1.5
> has material 462 ± 25.9 275 ± 7.5 60.2 ± 5.7
> has color 419 ± 21.6 234 ± 2.7 57.0 ± 11.6
> is type of 329 ± 140.7 141 ± 26.2 56.9 ± 32.7
> has affordance 337 ± 93.0 47 ± 13.3 16.3 ± 8.0

grading, we assumed the relationship type “has class” was always labeled as correct. This was to account for the behav-ior where the corresponding object in the image, for example, a detected “toilet” , is visually incorrect or misclassified, but correct relationships involving this object (e.g., “toilet”, “has material”, “ceramics” ) were proposed by the system. Thus, while the basic detections from YOLO-E might be wrong, the concept node and relation in the forest were still considered correct, as the approach does not assume failures in previous processing steps. Based on the correct and incorrect relationships, we calculated the accuracy of the models. Fig. 4a shows a subgroup of the forest that was generated from the uHumans2 apartment dataset. The same subgroup of the forest structure, with the individual SSGs marked, is shown in Fig. 4b. The quantitative results can be seen in Table I. Overall, to answer research question 1, the pipeline achieved a combined accuracy of ~61.4 % with an average of 276.2 correct relationships generated from around 50 object nodes, showing the system’s ability to generate a sizable number of valid semantic relationships. While higher accuracies (around 60-70 %) were shown for visual contex-tualized relationships (is type of, has color, or has material), knowledge-dependent relationships (has affordance) had low accuracy. The node accuracy values are comparable to simi-lar approaches like ConceptGraphs [8], which report a node accuracy of 61-71%. When inspecting generated relations (see Fig. 4a), it can be observed that the approach struggles with lexical variations in generated concepts (e.g., grasp vs grasping, push vs. pushing, rotate vs. rotating), leading to node duplications. On a semantic level without penalizing duplicaitons, the accuracy was therefore higher. Another common problem was self-referential relationships, especially for the instance-level relations. A sizable number of manipulation relations were generated; however, abstraction to meta-level relation-ships, like affordances, proved difficult. The approach has shown the ability to generate various semantically sound relationships and concept-nodes (see Fig. 4b). 

B. Downstream Task Suitabiltity 

To validate the suitability and advantages of a forest of 3D-HSSG in downstream task applications we utilized our approach to implement an open-vocabulary object re-trieval system. We presented the generated scene graph to a Qwen3-Coder [22] (30B parameters, Mixture-of-Experts, Instruct) LLM model with three methods — flat no at-tributes, flat with attributes and graph-based — and tasked it with identifying the objects requested by the user. The 

flat no attributes method presented only the objects in the object layer (the innermost ring shown in Figure 4b) as a flat list to the agent. This represents traditional scene graph methods where only object classes are recorded. The 

flat with attributes method additionally provides the related instance concept nodes for each object node. This is what comparable semantic scene graph methods utilize, with our extension of the instance concept nodes and edges being completely autonomously defined and extracted by the VLM and LLM pipeline. Lastly, the graph-based method provides the agent with tools, implemented in the smolagents [25] framework as a ReAct [26]-like reasoning system, to traverse the graph either bottom-up (from objects to concepts) or top-down (from concepts to objects). This method utilizes the full potential of the forests of scene graphs at an increased complexity for the agent operating on the data. First, we compared the performance of these three methods for object retrieval on offline datasets. This was done on the scene graph generated from the ScanNet [24] dataset utilized before. The comparison aims to showcase that our fully open-vocabulary scene-graph structure is suitable for downstream tasks, with various access methods, including utilizing the full graph structure, with significant drops in task performance. Legend 

> has class
> has material
> has color
> manipulable by
> has a ff ordance
> is type of
> chair (id:4)
> couch (id:18)
> dining table (id:9)
> pushing
> force application
> chair
> move
> couch
> fabric
> grasp
> moving
> lie down
> sit
> material
> sleep
> movement
> hold
> resting state
> physical action
> adjust position
> rotate
> push
> pulling
> dining table
> brown
> pull
> wood
> grasping
> rotating

(a) Hierarchical levels are displayed on a concentric ring showcasing the various edge types between the nodes. chair (id:4)      

> couch (id:18)
> dining table (id:9)
> sit
> chair pushing
> force application
> moving
> movement
> physical action
> move brown fabric wood
> material
> grasp
> hold
> couch
> lie down sleep
> resting state

(b) Subset of the Semantic subgraphs depicted as distinct trees. The object-layer nodes (blue) are grounding each subtree, but are not considered connections between the different trees. Fig. 4. Excerpt from the forest of 3D Hierarchical Semantic Scene Graph created from the uHumans2 dataset showing the hierarchies related to three objects (chair, couch, and dining table). For visual clarity, only one level of the subtree was included. TABLE II OBJECT RETRIEVAL TASK ACCURACY FOR THE THREE DIFFERENT ACCESS METHODS OF THE 3D-HSSG FOREST DATA. ACCURACY REPORTS THE NUMBER OF TIMES THE SYSTEM IDENTIFIED THE CORRECT OBJECT IN THE SCENE BASED ON THE QUERY. OVERALL, THREE RUNS WITH 20 OBJECTS EACH WERE QUERIED PER SCENE. FOR THE SCANNET SCENE, 80 OBJECTS WERE IDENTIFIED AND TRACKED BY THE SCENE GRAPH SYSTEM. 

Method Environment Avg. Accuracy (%) 

Flat no attr ScanNet 73.3 Flat with attr ( ours ) ScanNet 86.6 Graph-Based ( ours ) ScanNet 70.0 Flat no attr real 80 Flat with attr ( ours ) real 90 Graph-Based ( ours ) real 100 

Secondly, we evaluated the system in a real indoor envi-ronment with a Boston Dynamics Spot. For this use case, unstructured natural language tasks were given to the robot, and the open-vocabulary scene graph forests were used to identify objects mentioned in the task query. These identified objects were approximately localized using the bounding box data in the graph and then masked and grasped using previ-ously existing components. A key aspect of this evaluation was the disambiguation of similar objects and the utilization of conceptual information to identify the correct object candidates. Table II shows the accuracy and runtime of the object retrieval queries. Overall, three runs of 20 queries were run with each method. For the ScanNet dataset, more than 

70% of objects were disambiguated and identified correctly. Given the high object density and strong similarities between objects (e.g. diaper bag vs. backpack vs. duffle bag), the positive impact of the generated instance-level concept nodes can be highlighted, as they increased the amount of cor-rectly identified objects by ≈ 13% . The graph-based method does not significantly decrease performance compared to 

(a) Indoor Environment for real-world evaluation 

(b) Boston Dynamics Spot grasping an identified object Fig. 5. Visualization of the indoor environment and BostonDynamics Spot utilized for object retrieval. Figure 6 showcases an example query to the robot from this scenario. node_id: 55 has_material: concept__fabric      

> Bring me the plush Frog!
> get_concept_nodes()
> c_activity, c_behavior,c_functional, c_visual, c_apparel, c_rooms, [...]
> expand_node(c_visual)
> c_green, c_red,c_black, c_silver, c_yellow, c_purple, c_beige, [...]
> expand_node(c_green)
> obj_stu ff ed_animal, obj_robot
> expand_node(obj_stu ff ed_animal)
> fi nal_answer(55)
> [...] Fig. 6. Visualization of the task query given to the robot, the object description searched for in the scene graph, and the chain-of-thought of the agent.

the baseline flat no attributes method, while the LLM has to utilize the more complex datastructure. As showcased in Figure 6, the active context management induced by a traversable graph structure can guide an agent to a structured thought process, reducing hallucinations and false positives. The difference in performance for the graph-based method between the real world and ScanNet data can be explained by the increased density of the generated graph (1̃00 nodes vs. 4̃00 nodes), resulting in the agent failing to identify relevant regions before reaching its maximum allowed steps. This is an implementation specific restriction that does not limit the general applicability of the approach and will be addressed in future work. These observations mostly transfer to the real-world deployment, with the performance difference being attributable to more noisy object detections resulting in less tracked objects, and therefore a higher identification rate. Therefore, regarding research question 2 we find that the hierarchical structure and inclusion of concept nodes have a positive impact on the abilities of an LLM agent to consume the environmental model for downstream task applications. The grounding of the graph structures through the object-level nodes helps to keep the direct transfer of reasoning results to real-world actions. VI. DISCUSSION Given the results presented in the previous section, we can observe that our approach is capable of producing a significant number of relevant concept-nodes given the provided relationship types. While meta-level relations are still sparse, the instance-specific concepts generated were numerous, diverse in nature, and highly robotics-relevant. Many simple affordances related to object instances were generated effectively. With each tree of concept nodes be-ing rooted in a meta-level concept and grounded in the object nodes, this provides an intuitively traversable struc-ture for finding objects adhering to specific concepts (as seen in Fig. 4b). The hierarchy, going from meta-concepts to instances, complements concept-driven approaches, like SayPlan [1], by exposing more suitable initial concepts with shorter graph expansions to actual object nodes grounded in reality. This can also be observed in the agent traces shown in Fig. 6. Accommodating more perception-based applications, like SLAM, can be archived by adding grounded, instance-specific layers in the scene graph (e.g., places, rooms, etc.). A conceptually interesting idea is to combine the real-time capable object-focused pipelines from semantic SLAM systems [2] with the conceptual expansion of our approach. For applications like semantic navigation, this will yield additional benefits, like enhanced contextual considerations for queries and more exact and up-to-date grounding of objects. As mentioned, the proposed approach shows clear benefits for its application in semantic perception. It demonstrated its ability to generate novel and nested semantic relationships that are relevant for robotic tasks like object retrieval without requiring prior modeling. The open-vocabulary nature of our system enables the free-flow generative approach to concept node creation. The utilized non-realtime processing approach allows for the usage of high-compute foundation models and complex query structures. While this is required for the extensive utilization of the VLM and reasoning LLM, future improve-ments will aim towards a continuous live processing ap-proach, reducing the limitations for usage in mobile robotics applications, where bandwidth or network availabilty in general might be limited. We especially want to shift towards a continuously updating data structure, as outlined in our motivation in the introduction. VII. CONCLUSION In this work, we proposed an approach to generate a 

Forest of 3D Hierarchical Semantic Scene Graphs directly from RGB-D images using a VLM and LLM in an open-vocabulary-based approach. Each disjunct semantic scene graph is grounded in the scene on the object layer and models a hierarchy of semantic concepts, with meta-level concepts as the root and more specific concept nodes as inner nodes (see Fig. 4b). The method leverages a multi-step process to first generate the object nodes, followed by the instance-specific non-embodied concept nodes, and lastly the meta-level concept nodes. This approach has shown its ability to generate numerous novel, semantically correct, and robotics-relevant concept nodes and relationships in two realistic offline datasets and one real indoor scene during our eval-uations. We have shown the suitability of open-vocabulary forest of 3D-HSSG for downstream robotic applications. In summary, our contributions are:  

> •

We define forests of 3D Hierarchical Semantic Scene Graphs as a dynamic and spatially grounded semantic environment model. • We show and evaluate the ability to generate novel and semantically deep scene graphs in an open-vocabulary manner by leveraging a VLM and LLM on two state-of-the-art indoor scene datasets.  

> •

We validate the approach for downstream robotics ap-plications through an open-vocabulary object retrieval application, both on indoor datasets and in a real-world indoor deployment. Overall, we show the benefits of leveraging foundation models to generate complex and dynamic 3D-scene graphs with a focus on semantic environmental perception in mobile robotics use cases. Follow-up work will aim to integrate the generation pro-cess directly in real-time mapping frameworks, improve the system’s ability to generate meta-level concepts, and analyze its advantages in more real-world downstream tasks, like semantic navigation. We plan to add stronger post-processing to ensure graph expansion stays focused given the lexical variations observed during evaluation (see Fig. 4b). Additionally, we aim to open source the pipeline code and related datasets until the final paper publication. REFERENCES 

[1] Rana, K., Haviland, J., Garg, S., Abou-Chakra, J., Reid, I., and Suenderhauf, N., “SayPlan: Grounding large language models using 3d scene graphs for scalable robot task planning,” in Proceedings of The 7th Conference on Robot Learning , PMLR, Dec. 2, 2023, pp. 23–72. [2] Hughes, N., Chang, Y., and Carlone, L., “Hydra: A real-time spatial perception system for 3d scene graph construction and optimiza-tion,” in Robotics: Science and Systems XVIII , Robotics: Science and Systems Foundation, Jun. 27, 2022, ISBN: 978-0-9923747-8-5. DOI: 10.15607/RSS.2022.XVIII.050 

[3] Maggio, D. et al., Clio: Real-time task-driven open-set 3d scene graphs , Apr. 2024. DOI: 10.1109/LRA.2024.3451395 

[4] Armeni, I. et al., “3d scene graph: A structure for unified semantics, 3d space, and camera,” in 2019 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , Seoul, Korea (South): IEEE, Oct. 2019, pp. 5663–5672, ISBN: 978-1-7281-4803-8. DOI: 10.1109/ICCV. 2019.00576 

[5] Rosinol, A. et al., Kimera: From SLAM to spatial perception with 3d dynamic scene graphs , Jan. 2021. DOI: 10 . 1177 / 02783649211056674 

[6] Koch, S., Vaskevicius, N., Colosi, M., Hermosilla, P., and Ropin-ski, T., “Open3dsg: Open-vocabulary 3d scene graphs from point clouds with queryable objects and open-set relationships,” in 2024 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , Seattle, WA, USA: IEEE, Jun. 16, 2024, pp. 14 183– 14 193, ISBN: 979-8-3503-5300-6. DOI: 10.1109/CVPR52733. 2024.01345 

[7] Chen, W., Hu, S., Talak, R., and Carlone, L., Leveraging large (visual) language models for robot 3d scene understanding , Nov. 8, 2023. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2209.05629 

[8] Gu, Q. et al., “ConceptGraphs: Open-vocabulary 3d scene graphs for perception and planning,” in 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , May 2024, pp. 5021–5028. DOI: 10.1109/ICRA57147.2024.10610243 

[9] Chang, X., Ren, P., Xu, P., Li, Z., Chen, X., and Hauptmann, A., “A comprehensive survey of scene graphs: Generation and application,” 

IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 1–26, Jan. 2023, ISSN: 1939-3539. DOI: 10 . 1109/TPAMI.2021.3137605 

[10] Chen, L., Wang, X., Lu, J., Lin, S., Wang, C., and He, G., “Clip-driven open-vocabulary 3d scene graph generation via cross-modality contrastive learning,” in 2024 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2024, pp. 27 863–27 873. DOI: 10.1109/CVPR52733.2024.02632 

[11] Chang, H. et al., Context-aware entity grounding with open-vocabulary 3d scene graphs , 2023. DOI: 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2309.15940 

[12] Radford, A. et al., “Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision,” in Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning , PMLR, Jul. 1, 2021, pp. 8748– 8763. [13] Zhang, C. et al., Open-vocabulary functional 3d scene graphs for real-world indoor spaces , Mar. 24, 2025. DOI: 10 . 48550 / arXiv.2503.19199 

[14] Wu, S.-C., Wald, J., Tateno, K., Navab, N., and Tombari, F., “SceneGraphFusion: Incremental 3d scene graph prediction from RGB-d sequences,” in 2021 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , Nashville, TN, USA: IEEE, Jun. 2021, pp. 7511–7521, ISBN: 978-1-6654-4509-2. DOI: 10 . 1109/CVPR46437.2021.00743 

[15] Koch, S., Hermosilla, P., Vaskevicius, N., Colosi, M., and Ropinski, T., “Lang3dsg: Language-based contrastive pre-training for 3d scene graph prediction,” in 2024 International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV) , Mar. 2024, pp. 1037–1047. DOI: 10.1109/3DV62453. 2024.00076 

[16] Wald, J., Dhamo, H., Navab, N., and Tombari, F., “Learning 3d semantic scene graphs from 3d indoor reconstructions,” presented at the Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2020, pp. 3961–3970. DOI: 10.1109/ CVPR42600.2020.00402 

[17] Werby, A., Huang, C., Büchner, M., Valada, A., and Burgard, W., “Hierarchical open-vocabulary 3d scene graphs for language-grounded robot navigation,” Robotics: Science and Systems , 2024. DOI: 10.15607/RSS.2024.XX.077 

[18] Devarakonda, V. N. et al., OrionNav: Online planning for robot autonomy with context-aware LLM and open-vocabulary semantic scene graphs , Oct. 8, 2024. DOI: 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2410 . 06239 

[19] Kirillov, A. et al., Segment anything , Apr. 5, 2023. DOI: 10 . 48550/arXiv.2304.02643 

[20] Wang, A., Liu, L., Chen, H., Lin, Z., Han, J., and Ding, G., Yoloe: Real-time seeing anything , 2025. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2503. 07465 

[21] Besselmann, M. G., Puck, L., Steffen, L., Roennau, A., and Dillmann, R., “VDB-mapping: A high resolution and real-time capable 3d mapping framework for versatile mobile robots,” in 2021 IEEE 17th International Conference on Automation Science and Engineering (CASE) , Aug. 2021, pp. 448–454. DOI: 10 . 1109 / CASE49439.2021.9551430 

[22] Team, Q., Qwen3 technical report , 2025. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv. 2505.09388 

[23] Jocher, G., Qiu, J., and Chaurasia, A., Ultralytics YOLO , ver-sion 11.0.0, Jan. 10, 2023. [Online]. Available: https : / / github.com/ultralytics/ultralytics 

[24] Dai, A., Chang, A. X., Savva, M., Halber, M., Funkhouser, T., and Nießner, M., “ScanNet: Richly-annotated 3d reconstructions of indoor scenes,” in Proc. Computer vision and pattern recognition (CVPR), IEEE , 2017. DOI: 10.1109/CVPR.2017.261 

[25] Roucher, A., Moral, A. V. del, Wolf, T., Werra, L. von, and Kau-nismäki, E., ‘smolagents‘: A smol library to build great agentic sys-tems. https://github.com/huggingface/smolagents ,2025. [26] Yao, S. et al., React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models , 2023. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2210.03629