Title: Model-Driven Digital Twin Framework for Quantum Networks

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.10367v1

Published Time: Tue, 14 Jul 2026 01:53:28 GMT

Number of Pages: 10

Markdown Content:
# Model-Driven Digital Twin Framework for Quantum Networks 

# Amal Elsokary 

A.Elsokary@lboro.ac.uk Loughborough University Loughborough, UK 

# Hayato Ishida 

H.Ishida@lboro.ac.uk Loughborough University Loughborough, UK 

# Ran Wei 

r.wei5@lancaster.ac.uk Lancaster University Lancaster University, UK 

# Michael J. de C. Henshaw 

M.J.d.Henshaw@lboro.ac.uk Loughborough University Loughborough, UK 

# Siyuan Ji 

S.Ji@lboro.ac.uk Loughborough University Loughborough, UK 

## Abstract 

Quantum networks are advancing towards larger and more oper-ational infrastructures, yet their evaluation remains fragmented across heterogeneous physical platforms, simulators, protocols, and architectural abstractions. Current digital-twin studies for quantum networks mainly realise isolated capabilities or application-specific solutions rather than reusable system-level twins. This paper argues that Model-Driven Engineering (MDE) can provide a systematic basis for integrating and evolving these heterogeneous artefacts. It derives requirements for design-time evaluation and runtime synchronisation, and proposes a progression of architectures from code-driven and domain-model-driven solutions to point-to-point and hub-and-spoke integration. A conceptual implementation case study illustrates this using SysML v2, QKD kit, an EMF-based con-troller, and SeQUeNCe. The work provides a foundation for adapt-able and interoperable digital twins for quantum networks. 

## CCS Concepts 

• Software and its engineering → Model-driven software en-gineering ; Software architectures ; • Computer systems organi-zation → Embedded and cyber-physical systems .

## Keywords 

Digital twin, model-driven engineering, quantum networks, quan-tum network simulation, SysML v2 

## 1 Introduction 

Quantum networks (QNs) are progressing from experimental demon-strations towards increasingly deployed and scalable infrastruc-tures, enabling applications in secure communication, distributed quantum sensing, and distributed quantum computing [ 16 ]. This progression is accompanied by continuing advances in quantum photonic devices, communication and entanglement-distribution protocols, network architectures, and control mechanisms. How-ever, relying solely on physical experimentation and deployment to evaluate new technologies and network configurations can be costly and time-consuming and is often constrained by equipment availability, configuration complexity, and experimental risks [ 31 ]. Moreover, the heterogeneous and interconnected nature of QNs makes it difficult to understand their overall behaviour, predict their performance under emerging conditions, and evaluate the in-tegration of new technologies into existing network environments [29 ]. Their practical adoption therefore requires not only an under-standing of individual physical technologies, but also a system-level representation of the interactions and dependencies among com-ponents, services, protocols, control functions, and architectural layers [22]. These challenges create a need for a structured framework capa-ble of supporting anomaly detection, resource optimisation, tech-nology integration, and the assessment of alternative deployment decisions [ 28 ]. A digital twin (DT) perspective can address this need by virtually representing network components, services, interfaces, and physical characteristics to explore configurations, analyse be-haviour, predict performance, and assess technologies before and during physical deployment [45]. Research on DT for QNs is emerging, with recent studies address-ing remote access to experimental data, attack and imperfection analysis, performance optimisation, and monitoring and control of terrestrial and satellite quantum networks [ 2, 8 , 15 , 24 , 31 , 32 , 45 ]. These studies commonly employ quantum-network simulators and emulators as executable DT artefacts, including SimulaQron, NetSquid, SeQUeNCe, QKDNetSim, and Qiskit. Collectively, they demonstrate the potential of DT-enabled services, but the field re-mains at an early stage: most contributions realise selected capabili-ties or application-specific environments rather than an integrated, system-level DT spanning heterogeneous network representations, simulators, services, and physical assets. This limitation is reinforced by the absence of a widely adopted QN reference architecture and by the diversity of available simula-tion tools, which differ in their supported protocols, abstraction lev-els, fidelity, assumptions, and performance indicators [ 4 , 19 , 30 , 41 ]. Consequently, existing models and results are difficult to combine, compare, or reuse across tools and application contexts. The chal-lenge is therefore not only to introduce additional DT functions, but also to establish a systematic engineering basis for composing heterogeneous QN artefacts and progressively realising complete DT capabilities. Developing such a DT introduces further complexity because models, tools, data sources, and interfaces must remain consistent and traceable across physical and digital environments [ 20 ]. These artefacts operate with different data formats, abstraction levels, timing constraints, and synchronisation rates. Model-Driven Engi-neering (MDE) provides an opportunity to address this complexity by treating models as explicit and processable artefacts and using metamodels, transformations, model management, and automa-tion to connect system-level representations with domain-specific 

> 1arXiv:2607.10367v1 [cs.SE] 11 Jul 2026 Amal Elsokary, Hayato Ishida, Ran Wei, Michael J. de C. Henshaw, and Siyuan Ji

simulations, monitoring services, and physical-system interfaces [33]. Accordingly, this paper proposes an MDE-based framework for engineering QN digital twins at progressively increasing capability levels. It introduces alternative architectures for organising and integrating QN domain models, simulators, services, and physical-system interfaces, and derives the requirements needed to support both design-time evaluation and runtime synchronisation. A feasi-bility example further illustrates how a SysML v2 system model, an EMF-based simulator controller, and a QN simulator may be connected to evaluate a selected network configuration and its requirements. 

## 2 Background 

Quantum technology has progressed through two major revolutions [ 14 , 17 ]. The first quantum revolution, which began in the early twentieth century, established the foundational principles of quan-tum mechanics, including quantisation, wave–particle duality, and the uncertainty principle. The second quantum revolution emerged from advances in quantum information science, enabling superpo-sition and entanglement to be created, controlled, and exploited as technological resources within individual quantum systems. These developments underpin the fields of quantum communication, quan-tum computing, quantum simulation, and quantum sensing and metrology [1]. 

## 2.1 Quantum Networks (QN) 

The development of quantum networks can be traced through the broader evolution of quantum communication, which has become one of the most experimentally mature areas of quantum technol-ogy. Early progress was driven largely by secure communication, particularly quantum key distribution (QKD), and this supported the transition from small-scale experiments to operational quantum-network deployments, including the DARPA Quantum Network [ 18 ], SECOQC [ 37 ], and the Tokyo QKD Network [ 38 ]. Building on these achievements, quantum networking has expanded across fibre, free-space, and satellite infrastructures, enabling communica-tion over increasingly large distances [7, 27]. Beyond QKD, quantum network encompasses protocols that provide additional security services. Quantum digital signatures (QDS), for example, use quantum states to support message authen-tication, integrity, and non-repudiation [ 3]. The broader vision of quantum networking also extends beyond secure communication to the distribution and processing of quantum information through functions such as entanglement distribution, quantum teleportation, blind quantum computation, distributed quantum processing, and high-precision clock synchronisation [ 23 ], serving as the backbone for scalable quantum computing architectures and the quantum internet. As these technologies progress towards practical deployment, research and industrial efforts increasingly focus on integrating the hardware, communication protocols, network architectures, control mechanisms, and operational conditions required for reli-able, scalable, and interoperable quantum networks [ 42 ]. However, this progress is hindered by the absence of a unified and stan-dardised quantum-network architecture. Existing standards and architectural proposals adopt different layers, planes, functional components, and software-defined abstractions, making it more difficult to align technologies, coordinate functions, and integrate heterogeneous network elements [22, 40]. 

Figure 1: Reproduced architecture of quantum network lay-ers and their functions, developed by IEQNET, led by Fermi-lab [9, 10] 

Figure 1 presents one layered perspective of a quantum net-work, comprising physical infrastructure, device-control functions, network-control functions, and quantum-network applications. It illustrates how application-level capabilities, including QKD, quan-tum teleportation, and end-to-end entanglement distribution, de-pend on the coordinated operation of devices, protocols, and control functions across interconnected layers. Although the layers organisation and terminology may differ across architectural proposals, the figure demonstrates that the operation and performance of each layer depend on functions, resources, and information exchanged across other layers. This ar-chitectural diversity, together with the interdependence of network technologies, complicates the integration of heterogeneous compo-nents, the alignment of functions across layers, and the evaluation of system-level performance. Digital twins (DTs) offer a promising approach to addressing these challenges by providing connected digital representations through which layered architectures can be modelled, evaluated, and validated. They can also support the exploration of alternative configurations, the analysis of system behaviour, and operational decision-making. 

## 2.2 Digital Twin (DT) 

Digital twins (DTs) are being adopted across cyber-physical sys-tem (CPS) domains to support capabilities such as anomaly detec-tion, virtual experimentation, performance evaluation, and adaptive planning [ 25 , 43 ]. However, there is no single agreed definition or architecture for a DT. Its requirements, functions, components, and system boundaries are typically defined according to the ob-jectives and characteristics of the application domain [ 13 ]. As a result, numerous DT architectures have been proposed, with lim-ited agreement on their common components, functional elements, and interfaces [34]. 

> 2Model-Driven Digital Twin Framework for Quantum Networks

Rather than proposing a new definition, this study adopts the architectural conceptualisation of Michael et al. [ 33 ], in which a DT comprises three main components, as illustrated in Figure 2. The first is the actual system operating in the real environment and exchanging the data required for synchronisation. The second is the virtual representation, comprising models that describe the configuration and current state of the actual system. The third is a set of services supporting synchronisation at a defined rate, analysis derived from models, and the visualisation and reporting of information to DT users. 

Figure 2: DT conceptualisation to three main components: actual system, virtual representation (mirror), and service for synchronisation or user interface [33] 

Accordingly, a DT is considered a software-intensive system that connects an actual system with its virtual representation and provides services for monitoring, analysis, simulation, prediction, and decision support [ 33 ]. Depending on its purpose, it may also provide feedback that influences the state or behaviour of the actual system. DT-related models can be distinguished as models in the DT and models of the DT [ 21 , 33 ]. Models in the DT represent se-lected aspects of the actual system, such as its structure, behaviour, parameters, and operational state, and may include physics-based, simulation, or data-driven models. Models of the DT represent the DT itself as a software-intensive system, including its architecture, services, interfaces, and synchronisation mechanisms. This com-plexity gives rise to a fundamental engineering challenge: how DTs can be designed, developed, and evolved efficiently, effectively, and systematically [33, 46]. 

## 2.3 MDE for Quantum Network-DT 

The combined complexity of representing quantum networks and engineering their digital twins creates a need to coordinate hetero-geneous models, tools, interfaces, and configurations. Model-Driven Engineering (MDE) provides a suitable foundation by treating mod-els as first-class artefacts and using abstraction and automation to support the development, integration, maintenance, and evolution of software-intensive systems [5, 12, 39]. In a quantum-network DT, modelling languages and metamod-els can formalise system concepts, configurations, and interface contracts, while transformations, code generation, and model inter-pretation can connect system-level representations with domain-specific simulators, runtime services, monitoring mechanisms, and physical-system interfaces. Multi-view modelling, traceability, and consistency management can preserve relationships across struc-tural, behavioural, physical, and operational representations, while variability mechanisms support the systematic selection and com-parison of alternative protocols, technologies, simulators, and net-work configurations [ 5, 11 , 39 ]. Collectively, these techniques make integration decisions explicit and enable changes to be propagated across otherwise heterogeneous artefacts. These capabilities can be applied both to models in the DT, which represent the quantum network, and to models of the DT, which de-fine its architecture, services, interfaces, and synchronisation mech-anisms. MDE therefore provides a structured basis for integrating, validating, and evolving both the network representation and the supporting DT infrastructure throughout their lifecycle [ 6, 25 , 33 ]. Although it does not remove all DT engineering challenges, it offers established mechanisms for addressing them systematically. The framework requirements are organised around the two com-plementary loops shown in Figure 3. Loop 1 represents the design-time engineering process, in which requirements, test scenarios, configuration plans, application contexts, and physical imperfec-tions are used to configure suitable QN models and simulators. The resulting information supports design-space exploration, tech-nology verification, topological configuration, and performance optimisation, and may subsequently inform the implementation or reconfiguration of the physical system. Design Space Exploration  

> Technology Verification
> Topological Configuration
> Optimised Performance
> Test Scenarios
> Configuration plans
> Application Context
> Physical Imperfections
> DT framework
> Physical System

1

2

1

1 1

Figure 3: DT framework requirements across the design-time and runtime loops. 

Loop 2 represents runtime synchronisation and co-evolution between the DT framework and the operational physical system. Measurements, system states, performance indicators, and emer-gent behaviours update the digital representations at an appropriate synchronisation rate, enabling comparison between predicted and observed behaviour, deviation detection, and assessment against operational requirements. 

> 3Amal Elsokary, Hayato Ishida, Ran Wei, Michael J. de C. Henshaw, and Siyuan Ji

Together, the two loops define the requirements for a QN-DT framework that supports both the evaluation of alternative con-figurations before deployment and the continued monitoring and evolution of the network during operation. The following sections present the MDE-based architectures proposed to realise these re-quirements. 

## 3 Proposed Approaches 

Figure 4 presents four progressive architectures for engineering digital twins of quantum networks using MDE techniques. The architectures differ in both the artefact used to establish the rela-tionship between the simulated and physical systems and the scope of the QN being represented. In Architecture (a), configuration and synchronisation knowledge is embedded in a shared control script. Architecture (b) makes this knowledge explicit through a domain-specific model and its associated simulation and physical drivers. Architectures (c and d) extend this model-driven approach to a QN system of systems containing multiple interacting domains, simu-lators, and physical subsystems. Two alternatives are considered at this level: direct point-to-point integration among the participating domain models and integration through a common system model. The progression therefore moves from implementation-specific code, through single-domain model-driven integration, to multi-domain system-level integration. 

## 3.1 Code-Driven Digital Twin 

In this architecture, shown in Figure 4(a), a bespoke shared control script directly coordinates a predefined simulated–physical-system configuration. The script contains the parameter mappings, ex-ecution logic, data conversions, and feedback rules required to configure both environments, initiate their execution, collect their outputs, and compare their behaviour. Its implementation is feasi-ble through software interfaces and embedded control hardware, such as FPGA-based controllers, which can translate script com-mands into physical actions and acquire measurements from the experimental system. This provides a practical means of applying corresponding configurations to the simulator and hardware and assessing their performance. However, the architecture does not provide an automated data or feedback pipeline between the two environments. The user must observe and interpret the results, determine the next action, and manually initiate a further execution of the script. It therefore supports a human-in-the-loop sequence of experiments rather than continuous synchronisation or autonomous closed-loop control. Its limitation is that the integration knowledge remains embed-ded in implementation-specific code and is closely coupled to the available parameters, sensing channels, hardware interfaces, data formats, and commands. Introducing an additional property for evaluation may require not only revision and revalidation of the script, but also extensions to the physical measurement and con-trol interfaces. One example is provided by Ahmadian et al. [ 2], extending an experiment from evaluating channel attenuation to monitoring and compensating for state-of-polarisation variations requires additional measurements, optical-component controls, and interpretation logic to relate polarisation changes to QBER and key-exchange performance. Consequently, adopting the architecture for a different QN configuration or evaluation concern may require co-ordinated modification of the script and both environment-specific interfaces. 

## 3.2 Domain Model-Driven Digital Twin 

The second architecture, illustrated in Figure 4(b), introduces a domain-specific modelling layer for quantum network systems. The domain model forms part of a middleware layer that coordi-nates the simulated and physical environments through simulation and physical drivers. These drivers translate domain concepts into environment-specific configurations, commands, and data. MDE techniques enable this coordination: model interpretation allows behavioural or orchestration models to be executed directly, while model-to-model and model-to-text transformations derive simula-tor configurations, interface adapters, hardware commands, and other executable artefacts required to operate both environments. Validation rules may additionally be used to check constraints and parameter mappings before execution. The progression from the code-driven to the domain-model-driven architecture reflects a change in how system and integra-tion knowledge is represented, processed, reused, and maintained. The code-driven architecture is primarily suited to a predefined experimental configuration. A change in the network topology, protocol, component parameters may require the script to be modi-fied manually and subsequently realigned with both environments. The domain model-driven architecture introduces a higher level of abstraction above this implementation-specific coordination. The domain model does not merely provide a descriptive representa-tion of the QN. Behavioural and orchestration models are inetnded to be processable and executable, enabling information and data exchange to be derived systematically for both the simulated and physical environments. This enables the simulated and physical representations to evolve together while preserving their corre-spondence with the authoritative model. 

## 3.3 System-of-Systems Model-Driven Digital Twin 

Architecture (b) establishes a model-driven relationship between a domain model, a quantum-network simulator, and the correspond-ing physical system. This is appropriate where the DT is intended to evaluate a particular QN concern or a selected simulator–physical-system pairing. However, the behaviour and performance of a quantum network as a whole cannot always be determined from one domain in isolation. A QN contains interacting physical and software-intensive subsystems associated with concerns such as quantum devices and channels, protocol operation, security, rout-ing, scheduling, resource management, and classical control. The behaviour represented in one domain may therefore influence the assumptions, parameters, and outputs of other domains. Architecture (c and d) extends the domain-model-driven ap-proach to this system-of-systems scope. Multiple specialised do-main models are used to represent the relevant QN concerns, while each remains associated with the quantum-network simulator and physical subsystem appropriate to that domain. MDE is required not only to derive executable artefacts for each simulated–physical pair-ing, but also to represent, transform, and maintain the dependencies 

> 4Model-Driven Digital Twin Framework for Quantum Networks (b) Domain Model -Driven Digital Twin
> (d) Hub and Spoke Integrated Digital Twin (c) Point -to -Point Integrated Digital Twin
> (a) Code -Driven Digital Twin

Figure 4: Progressive architectures for QN digital twins: (a) a script-driven architecture in which a shared control script directly coordinates the simulated and physical systems; (b) a domain-model-driven architecture in which a domain-specific model and embodiment-specific drivers govern their configuration and interaction; (c) a point-to-point integrated architecture in which multiple DSLs interact through direct relationships to represent cross-domain interdependencies; and (d) a hub-and-spoke integrated architecture in which a general system model coordinates multiple domain models and the corresponding physical QN system of systems. 

among the participating domain models. These dependencies are necessary for evaluating the integrated behaviour of the network, because effects introduced within one subsystem may propagate through other subsystems and influence system-level measures such as QBER, secret-key rate, latency, and service delivery. Two model-driven integration alternatives are considered. Fig-ure 4 (c) illustrates the domain models as independent authori-tative representations and establishes direct point-to-point map-pings, transformations, and consistency mechanisms between those that interact. Figure 4 (d) introduces a common QN system model through which the participating domain models and their dependen-cies are coordinated. Both alternatives represent the same physical system of systems and preserve the specialised simulator associated with each domain; however, they differ in how cross-domain inte-gration knowledge is organised and how the required engineering effort grows as additional domains are incorporated. To formalise this comparison, let the physical QN system of systems be represented as 

> 5Amal Elsokary, Hayato Ishida, Ran Wei, Michael J. de C. Henshaw, and Siyuan Ji

𝐺 𝑃 = (𝑉 𝑃 , 𝐸 𝑃 ), (1) where 𝑉 𝑃 = {𝑃 1, 𝑃 2, . . . , 𝑃 𝑛 } denotes the participating physical subsystems and 𝐸 𝑃 denotes their physical and operational interde-pendencies. Each subsystem or engineering concern is represented by a domain model 𝑀 𝑖 , constructed using a DSL. Each domain model is associated with its relevant simulator 𝑆 𝑖 and physical subsystem 

𝑃 𝑖 :

𝑀 𝑖 |= 𝐷𝑆𝐿 𝑖 , 𝑀 𝑖 ↔ 𝑆 𝑖 , 𝑀 𝑖 ↔ 𝑃 𝑖 , 𝑖 = 1, . . . , 𝑛. (2) The following two alternatives examine how the dependencies among these domain models can be engineered to support evalua-tion of the integrated QN behaviour. 

3.3.1 Point-to-Point Integrated Digital Twin: 

In the point-to-point approach, each domain model remains an independent representation of its corresponding physical subsys-tem and simulation environment, as shown in Figure 4(c). The integrated behaviour of the network is established through direct relationships between the participating DSLs. In the illustraitve ex-ample in Figure 4(c), each physcial system of the three is interfacing every other physical system, resulting in the need of 3 relationships to be established between the corresponding DSLs. Depending on the nature of the relationships, they might be implemented using model-to-model transformations, model interpretation, semantic mappings, and code generation. Depending on the actual need for DSL relationships to consis-tently reflect those appearing between the physical systems, for 

𝑛 -DSLs, the total number of unique pairwise relationships between is bounded by a worst case number, calculated as 

𝑟 (𝑛 ) =

> 𝑛 −1

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

𝑟 𝑖 = 𝑛 (𝑛 − 1)

2 , (3) suggesting a qudratic scaling, as new system is introduced into the network. In addition, every domain model must remain connected to its corresponding simulator and physical subsystem. Consequently, modifying or extending one domain model, or its governing DSL metamodel, may require several related mappings and interfaces to be revised and revalidated. This approach remains feasible for DTs with a limited scope, involving only a small number of domain models or DSLs that share a common metamodel and have stable dependencies. However, its maintainability and scalability decrease as the DT expands to represent wider quantum networks with multiple interacting domains, and could quickly become infeasible for a real-world system of systems that has multi-layers and multi-systems, like the one shown in Figure 4. 

3.3.2 Hub-and-Spoke Integrated Digital Twin: 

In the hub-and-spoke approach, the specialised domain models do not exchange information through direct pairwise mappings. In-stead, each domain model is related independently to a general QN system model, which acts as the hub through which their concepts, parameters, results, and interdependencies are integrated. Each domain model remains associated with the quantum-network sim-ulator appropriate to its concern, while the hub model provides the system-level representation required to interpret their combined effects on the operational physical network. At the model level, the corresponding domain model (𝑀 𝑖 ) is transformed, projected, or interpreted within the general QN sys-tem model (𝑀 𝑄 𝑁 ). Each domain model also retains a one-to-one association with its corresponding simulator (𝑆 𝑖 ):

𝜇 𝑖 → 𝑀 QN , 𝑀 𝑖 ↔ 𝑆 𝑖 . (4) When domain models are introduced sequentially, each addi-tional model requires only one mapping to the hub. Therefore, for 

𝑛 -domain models, the total number of domain-to-hub mappings is 

𝑁 Hub (𝑛 ) = 𝑛. (5) Accordingly, the number of required mappings grows linearly with the number of participating domain models. Each domain model additionally requires one association with its corresponding simulator. Under the simplifying assumption that the hub model maintains one system-level direct relationship with the operational physical QN. One scenario implementation may integrate two domain models. For example, a QKD protocol model may represent basis selection, sifting, and key generation, while a channel model may represent Eve’s interception, attenuation, and noise. Integrating these models through the hub enables their combined effect on QBER and secret-key rate to be assessed. A wider implementation may include a third model represent-ing device imperfections, such as detector efficiency, dark counts, source intensity, or polarisation drift. A fourth model may represent network-level concerns, including topology, routing, scheduling, resource allocation, or key-management demand. The hub model relates these domains to evaluate how device behaviour, proto-col operation, channel conditions, and network-control decisions collectively affect system-level performance. The dependencies represented within the hub model correspond to the interactions that already exist among the physical subsys-tems in the operational QN. The hub model does not remove these physical dependencies. Instead, it provides a common representa-tion through which their propagated effects can be traced, analysed, and related to physical measurements and control actions. The novelty of this proposed MDE-enabled approach lies in providing a reusable system-level structure through which the DT can be adapted to different QN configurations, simulators, and engineering artefacts, rather than remaining limited to isolated and purpose-specific evaluations. These architectures represent increasing degrees of model gov-ernance rather than mutually exclusive definitions of a digital twin. Script-based adapters may remain necessary at the physical and simulator boundaries, while domain-specific models provide spe-cialised executable representations. The proposed contribution is to govern these artefacts through a system-level model that makes their configuration, relationships, transformation paths, and physi-cal counterparts explicit across the progressive DT capabilities, as discussed in table 1. 

> 6Model-Driven Digital Twin Framework for Quantum Networks

Table 1: Capabilities and limitations of the proposed architectures against the four DT capabilities 

Architecture R1: Representation R2: Replication R3: Reality R4: Relation Architecture a: Code-Driven Digital Twin Limited: Represents one predefined, implementation-specific configuration. 

Limited: Applies correspond-ing parameters to the simu-lated and physical systems and compares their outputs. 

Limited: Supports prediction and assessment, but new sce-narios require additional cod-ing and manual modification. 

Not supported: Synchronisa-tion, feedback, and updates are not supported. 

Architecture b: Do-main Model-Driven Digital Twin Supported: Represents struc-ture, behaviour, requirements, constraints, and relationships within one domain. 

Supported: Derives simu-lated and physical configura-tions from the same domain model. 

Supported: Enables reusable scenarios and configurations through interpretation and transformation. 

Limited: Runtime synchroni-sation requires external dri-vers and execution infrastruc-ture. 

Architecture c: Point to Point Integrated Digital Twin Supported: Represents multi-ple QN subsystems and their pairwise dependencies. 

Supported: Replicates subsys-tems through corresponding simulations and physical map-pings. 

Limited. System-level analy-sis depends on the correct co-ordination of the participating models and simulations. 

Limited. Growing mappings and consistency rules compli-cate synchronisation and feed-back. 

Architecture d: Hub and Spoke Inte-grated Digital Twin Supported: Represents the QN as an integrated system of specialised domain models. 

Supported: Combines simula-tion outputs to replicate phys-ical QN behaviour. 

Supported: Enables system-level analysis, optimisation, and cross-domain assessment. 

Supported: Enables system-level synchronisation and feedback, subject to recon-ciling timing, abstraction, assumptions, and fidelity. 

## 4 Proof of Concept 

As discussed earlier, an adaptable and reusable framework is needed to address the diversity and complexity of quantum network sys-tems. This section presents a proof of concept for selected elements of the hub-and-spoke architecture introduced in Architecture (d). The purpose is to demonstrate a feasible implementation path in which the physical hardware configuration and system require-ments are represented in the hub model, translated into simulator-specific configuration information, and executed by a selected sim-ulator. SysML v2 is selected for the hub model because it provides graph-ical and textual modelling capabilities [ 35 ], supports the distinc-tion between definitions and usages, and offers a standard API for integration and automation [ 36 ]. Its graphical notation can repre-sent the physical network, including its structural and behavioural relationships, while its machine-processable textual notation in-cludes supports model querying, transformation, and integration with external tools. Moreover, the distinction between definitions and usages enables reusable QN concepts to be instantiated and specialised for particular protocols, physical configurations, and evaluation scenarios. The standard modelling API further supports interoperability and automation across connected artefacts. The path in Figure 5 illustrates a hub model instantiated ac-cording to the physical structure of the system. The hub model defines the required system structure, evaluation requirements, and test configurations, which can then be tested through both simula-tion and physical environments. Integration with the simulator is mediated through an EMF-based domain-specific controller. A model-to-model transformation uses the SysML v2 configura-tion to create a simulator-control model. This separation keeps the hub independent of a particular simulator and enables alternative simulators to be integrated through different domain-specific con-trollers and adapters. Finally, the simulated and measured results from both environments are returned to the hub model and evalu-ated against the defined requirements to check compliance. Direct integration between the hardware and SysML environment can be supported through a hardware-interface mechanism, such as that demonstrated by SHIA [26]. EMF    

> Meta -Model
> Listing 3
> Conforms to
> EMF
> Controller
> Listing 4
> Hub Model
> (SysML v2)
> Listing 2
> SeQUeNCe
> (Python)
> Listing 5
> Hardware
> QKD -Kit
> Figure 6
> System Structure/ Performance
> Quantum Library
> (SysML v2)
> Listing 1
> Uses
> M2M M2T
> Test Results (JSON)
> SysML v2
> Meta -Model
> Extends
>  Test Configuration  →

Figure 5: Mapping of the hub-and-spoke QN digital-twin architecture to the BB84 feasibility implementation. 

Listing 1 illustrates the quantum-network library, where con-cepts and definitions are modelled for further instantiation and specialisation. Application-specific QN packages are defined to rep-resent selected network implementations and evaluation contexts. The SimulationExchangePort and HardwareMeasurementPort 

definitions prepare the hub model to exchange configurations and results with external artefacts, including simulator controllers and physical hardware. These definitions are therefore not intended to represent one specific setup directly, but to provide reusable modelling concepts from which later QKD configurations can be instantiated and specialised. 

> 7Amal Elsokary, Hayato Ishida, Ran Wei, Michael J. de C. Henshaw, and Siyuan Ji

Listing 1: SysML v2 representation of the general QN hub model.                                                        

> package QN {package QNApplicationContext {package QKD_Network {part def QKDprtocol ; part def sender ; part def receiver ; connection def QuantumChannel ; connection def ClassicalChannel ; enum def QKD_Protocol {BB84 ; B92 ; }item def testConfiguration ; item def PerformanceResult {attribute throughput :Real ; attribute keyRate :Real ; attribute latency :Real ; attribute errorRate :Real ; }requirement def performanceRequirement {subject performance :QKD_Protocol ; attribute maxValue :Real ; }part def PhysicalQKDSystem ; part def QuantumNetworkSimulator ; part def SimulatorController ; port def SimulationExchangePort ; port def HardwareMeasurementPort ; }}}

This feasibility example uses a BB84 QKD kit as a simple setup to demonstrate the implementation feasibility, as shown in Figure 6. Alice and Bob are connected through a free-space quantum channel with distance d, and the two nodes communicate to generate a secret key. To produce the final key, a post-processing step is required, in which the error rate is measured as an indicator of performance. The distance d is treated as a configurable parameter that can be varied to evaluate its effect on the resulting error rate. 

Figure 6: BB84 QKD hardware 

Based on this experiment, a SysML hub model is created to act as a single source of truth in which the actual system and DT con-figuration are represented. This enables network configurations, requirements, test scenarios, interface contracts, and returned per-formance results to be captured in a single model, as shown in Listing 2. The Alice and Bob part usages, their quantum and classi-cal channel usages, and the test-configuration usage are typed by the definitions introduced in Listing 1. The controllerPort and hardwarePort support the respective exchanges with the selected simulator and physical kit, while the 

errorRate requirement usage defines the threshold applied to both returned results. The simulated and measured error-rate values are allocated to their corresponding elements and evaluated against the defined error-rate requirement. A configuration is accepted when both constraints are satisfied; otherwise, additional parameters, such as attenuation or detector characteristics, can be incorporated and evaluated through both environments. 

Listing 2: SysML v2 representation of the BB84 configuration, exchange ports, and error-rate requirement.                                                                                          

> package BB84_Network {private import QNApplicationContext :: QKD_Network ::*; part BB84_Protocol :QKDprotocol {part Alice :sender ; part Bob :receiver ; connection QC :QuantumChannel connect Alice to Bob {attribute distance :Real ; }connection CC :ClassicalChannel connect Alice to Bob ; }requirement errorRate : performanceRequirement {attribute maxAllowedErrorRate =0.11; require constraint {simulatedErrorRate <= maxAllowedErrorRate }require constraint {measuredErrorRate <= maxAllowedErrorRate }}item QC_configuration :testConfiguration {attribute QC_distance =1[m ]; }item measuredErrorRate :PerformanceResult ; item simulatedErrorRate :PerformanceResult ; part qkdKit :PhysicalQKDSystem ; part SeQUeNCe :QuantumNetworkSimulator ; part emfController :SimulatorController ; port controllerPort :SimulationExchangePort {out item QC_configuration :testConfiguration ; in item simulatedResult :PerformanceResult ; }port hardwarePort :HardwareMeasurementPort {out item QCconfiguration :testConfiguration ; in item measuredResult :PerformanceResult }}

A model-to-model (M2M) transformation uses the SysML v2 configuration and evaluation scenario to create a simulator-control model. The controller metamodel defines the structure that this model must conform to, including the simulator and experiment to be executed, the input parameters to be supplied, and the out-puts to be returned. The resulting controller instance provides an explicit mapping between SysML v2 properties and the correspond-ing simulator inputs and outputs. Listing 3 presents the controller metamodel using Emfatic. 

Listing 3: Emfatic metamodel for the simulator controller.                                      

> @namespace ( uri =" http :// qndt / controller ", prefix =" qnctrl " )package controller ; class SimulatorController {attr String simulator ; val Experiment experiment ; val Input [*] inputs ; val Output [*] outputs ; }class Experiment {attr String protocol ;
> 8Model-Driven Digital Twin Framework for Quantum Networks
> attr String sender ; attr String receiver ; }class Input {attr String sysmlQualifiedName ; attr String simulatorParameter ; attr EDouble value ; attr String unit ; }class Output {attr String simulatorMetric ; attr String resultFile ; attr String sysmlQualifiedName ; }

Listing 4 presents an XMI controller instance that invokes a Se-QUeNCe simulator [ 44 ] and BB84 experiment, and maps the SysML v2 quantum-channel distance to the corresponding simulator pa-rameter. The output binding maps the mean_error_rate field in the JSON result to the corresponding simulated error-rate property in the SysML v2 model. 

Listing 4: EMF controller instance for the SeQUeNCe BB84 experiment.   

> <? xml version ="1.0" encoding =" ASCII "? > < qnctrl : SimulatorController xmi : version ="2.0" xmlns : xmi =" http :// www . omg . org / XMI " xmlns : qnctrl =" http :// qndt / controller " xmi : id =" _NS7_4HbKEfGv - tGzRUrLbQ " simulator =" SeQUeNCe "> < experiment xmi : id =" _QC9QcHbKEfGv - tGzRUrLbQ " protocol =" BB84 " sender =" Alice " receiver =" Bob "/ > < inputs xmi : id =" _vkyDAHbLEfGv - tGzRUrLbQ " sysmlQualifiedName = " QN :: BB84_Network :: QC_configuration :: Distance " simulatorParameter =" QC_Distance " value ="1.0" unit =" m "/ > < outputs xmi : id =" _37J4EHbLEfGv - tGzRUrLbQ " simulatorMetric =" mean_error_rate " resultFile =" bb84_results . json " sysmlQualifiedName = " QN :: BB84_Network :: simulatedErrorRate :: errorRate "/ > </ qnctrl : SimulatorController >

The execution adapter reads the input bindings, assigns their values to the corresponding SeQUeNCe parameters, and executes the BB84 experiment shown in Listing 5. The experiment config-ures the channel distance and specifies a key size of 256 bits and a simulation end time. Although additional parameters and perfor-mance measures could be incorporated, this example varies only the quantum-channel distance to align with the physical QKD demon-stration. The resulting mean_error_rate is exported to the JSON file, returned to the corresponding SysML v2 property identified by the output binding. 

Listing 5: SeQUeNCe BB84 channel configuration, execution, and result export.                          

> qc =QuantumChannel ( " qc0 ", tl , distance = QC_Distance )pair_bb84_protocols ( alice . protocol_stack [0] , bob . protocol_stack [0] )process =Process ( alice . protocol_stack [0] , " push ", [256 , math . inf , 6 e12 ] )bb84 =alice . protocol_stack [0] mean_error_rate =(sum ( bb84 . error_rates ) /len ( bb84 . error_rates ) if bb84 . error_rates else None )results ={" protocol ": " BB84 ", " distance_m ": QC_Distance , " mean_error_rate ": mean_error_rate }with open ( " bb84_results . json ", "w", encoding =" utf -8" )as file : json . dump ( results , file , indent =4)

Although this feasibility example does not fully implement Ar-chitecture (d), it demonstrates a viable model-driven path linking the SysML v2 hub, a physical QKD kit, and a corresponding QN simulation. The same network configuration is applied to both en-vironments, enabling the test configuration to be assessed and the results to be returned to the hub. This aligns with the two loops in Figure 3, which identify the DT requirements for design-time evaluation and runtime synchronisation. It also aligns with the ca-pability of SysML v2 to support several tools, hardware, scenarios, and technologies. Future work is required to demonstrate the full implementation by automating the transformations, integrating additional simulators and domain models, and realising runtime synchronisation. 

## 5 Conclusions 

This paper examined the emerging use of digital twins for quan-tum networks and identified key requirements, including scala-bility, adaptability, interoperability, consistency, and traceability. It proposed progressive code-driven, domain-model-driven, and system-model-driven architectures, showing how MDE can make integration knowledge more explicit, reusable, and manageable. Future work will implement and evaluate the framework as an integrated QN digital twin with swappable simulator and hardware interfaces, enabling performance assessment across different proto-cols, physical effects, configurations, and operational scenarios. 

## References           

> [1] Antonio Acín, Immanuel Bloch, Harry Buhrman, Tommaso Calarco, Christopher Eichler, Jens Eisert, Daniel Esteve, Nicolas Gisin, Steffen J Glaser, Fedor Jelezko, et al .2018. The quantum technologies roadmap: a European community view.
> New Journal of Physics 20, 8 (2018), 080201. [2] Morteza Ahmadian, Marc Ruiz, Jaume Comellas, and Luis Velasco. 2024. Darius: A digital twin to improve the performance of quantum key distribution. Journal of Lightwave Technology 42, 5 (2024), 1356–1367. [3] Ryan Amiri and Erika Andersson. 2015. Unconditionally secure quantum signa-tures. Entropy 17, 8 (2015), 5635–5659. 9

Amal Elsokary, Hayato Ishida, Ran Wei, Michael J. de C. Henshaw, and Siyuan Ji 

[4] Oceane Bel and Mariam Kiran. 2025. Simulators for quantum network modeling: A comprehensive review. Computer Networks 263 (2025), 111204. [5] Marco Brambilla, Jordi Cabot, and Manuel Wimmer. 2017. Model-driven software engineering in practice . Morgan & Claypool Publishers. [6] Lola Burgueño, Davide Di Ruscio, Houari Sahraoui, and Manuel Wimmer. 2025. Automation in Model-Driven Engineering: A look back, and ahead. ACM Trans-actions on Software Engineering and Methodology 34, 5 (2025), 1–25. [7] Yu-Ao Chen, Qiang Zhang, Teng-Yun Chen, Wen-Qi Cai, Sheng-Kai Liao, Jun Zhang, Kai Chen, Juan Yin, Ji-Gang Ren, Zhu Chen, et al . 2021. An integrated space-to-ground quantum communication network over 4,600 kilometres. Nature 

589, 7841 (2021), 214–219. [8] Francesco Chiti, Tommaso Pecorella, Roberto Picchi, and Laura Pierucci. 2025. To-wards digital-twin assisted software-defined quantum satellite networks. Sensors 

25, 3 (2025), 889. [9] Joaquin Chung, Ely M Eastman, Gregory S Kanter, Keshav Kapoor, Nikolai Lauk, Cristian H Pena, Robert K Plunkett, Neil Sinclair, Jordan M Thomas, Raju Valivarthi, et al . 2022. Design and implementation of the Illinois Express quantum metropolitan area network. IEEE Transactions on Quantum Engineering 3 (2022), 1–20. [10] Joaquin Chung, Gregory Kanter, Nikolai Lauk, Raju Valivarthi, Wenji Wu, Rus-sell R Ceballos, Cristián Peña, Neil Sinclair, Jordan Thomas, Si Xie, et al . 2021. Illinois Express Quantum Network (IEQNET): metropolitan-scale experimental quantum networking over deployed optical fiber. In Quantum information science, sensing, and computation XIII , Vol. 11726. SPIE, 1172602. [11] Antonio Cicchetti, Federico Ciccozzi, and Alfonso Pierantonio. 2019. Multi-view approaches for software and system modelling: a systematic literature review. 

Software & Systems Modeling 18, 6 (2019), 3207. [12] Alberto Rodrigues Da Silva. 2015. Model-driven engineering: A survey supported by the unified conceptual model. Computer languages, systems & structures 43 (2015), 139–155. [13] Manuela Dalibor, Nico Jansen, Bernhard Rumpe, David Schmalzing, Louis Wacht-meister, Manuel Wimmer, and Andreas Wortmann. 2022. A cross-domain sys-tematic mapping study on software engineering for digital twins. Journal of Systems and Software 193 (2022), 111361. [14] Ivan H Deutsch. 2020. Harnessing the power of the second quantum revolution. 

PRX Quantum 1, 2 (2020), 020101. [15] Angela Diaz-Bricio, Blanca Lopez, Ivan Vidal, and Francisco Valera. 2025. A Digital Twin Approach to Quantum Key Distribution Under Eavesdropping. In 

2025 International Conference on Quantum Communications, Networking, and Computing (QCNC) . IEEE, 143–150. [16] Brian Doolittle and Michael Cubeddu. 2026. Quantum Network Simulation and Emulation: A Roadmap for Quantum Internet Design. In 2026 International Conference on Quantum Communications, Networking, and Computing (QCNC) .593–600. doi:10.1109/QCNC69040.2026.00099 [17] Jonathan P Dowling and Gerard J Milburn. 2003. Quantum technology: the second quantum revolution. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 361, 1809 (2003), 1655–1674. [18] Chip Elliott. 2002. Building the quantum network. doi:10.1088/1367-2630/4/1/346 [19] Amal Elsokary, Hayato Ishida, Catherine White, Stephen Powley, Maria Aslam, Michael Henshaw, and Siyuan Ji. 2026. Digital Engineering for Quantum Com-munication Networks: A Systematic Review of Models, Simulators, and Testbeds. 

Engineering Archive (2026), 30. doi:10.31224/6630 [20] John Ahmet Erkoyuncu, Peter Butala, Rajkumar Roy, et al . 2018. Digital twins: Understanding the added value of integrated models for through-life engineering services. Procedia Manufacturing 16 (2018), 139–146. [21] Alexander Hellwig, Judith Michael, Jérôme Pfeiffer, Bernhard Rumpe, Henrik Thillmann, and Andreas Wortmann. 2025. Digital Twins in Manufacturing and the Use of Models. CEUR-WS (2025), xx–yy. doi:10.5283/epub.78368 [22] Jessica Illiano, Marcello Caleffi, Antonio Manzalini, and Angela Sara Cacciapuoti. 2022. Quantum internet protocol stack: A comprehensive survey. Computer Networks 213 (2022), 109092. [23] Vinay Kumar, Claudio Cicconetti, Marco Conti, and Andrea Passarella. 2025. Quantum internet: Technologies, protocols, and research challenges. Interna-tional Journal of Networked and Distributed Computing 13, 2 (2025), 22. [24] Florian Kutschera, Emir Dervisevic, Ladislav Behan, Diego López, Miralem Mehic, Miroslav Voznak, Hannes Hübel, Antonio Pastor, and Luis Cepeda. 2021. Data acquisition and simulation tools for virtual QKD testbed access–examples from the OPENQD project. In 2021 European Conference on Optical Communication (ECOC) . IEEE, 1–4. [25] Daniel Lehner, Jingxi Zhang, Jérôme Pfeiffer, Sabine Sint, Ann-Kathrin Splettstößer, Manuel Wimmer, and Andreas Wortmann. 2025. Model-driven en-gineering for digital twins: a systematic mapping study: D. Lehner et al. Software and Systems Modeling 24, 5 (2025), 1339–1377. [26] Charles Lewis, Amal Elsokary, and Siyuan Ji. 2026. SHIA: A Direct SysML-Hardware Interface Architecture for Model-Centric Verification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.11248 (2026). [27] Sheng-Kai Liao, Wen-Qi Cai, Wei-Yue Liu, Liang Zhang, Yang Li, Ji-Gang Ren, Juan Yin, Qi Shen, Yuan Cao, Zheng-Ping Li, et al . 2017. Satellite-to-ground quantum key distribution. Nature 549, 7670 (2017), 43–47. [28] Blanca Lopez, Angela Diaz-Bricio, Ivan Vidal, Francisco Valera, and Diego R Lopez. 2025. Monitoring Strategy for Enhanced Adaptability in QKD Networks. In 2025 International Conference on Quantum Communications, Networking, and Computing (QCNC) . IEEE, 254–260. [29] Blanca Lopez, Ivan Vidal, Francisco Valera, Diego R Lopez, and Antonio Pas-tor. 2024. Unleashing flexibility and interoperability in QKD networks: The power of softwarized architectures. In 2024 International Conference on Quantum Communications, Networking, and Computing (QCNC) . IEEE, 216–220. [30] Diego R López, Blanca Lopez, and Vicente Martin. 2025. An Architectural Framework in Support of the Quantum Internet. In 2025 International Conference on Quantum Communications, Networking, and Computing (QCNC) . IEEE, 309– 314. [31] Raul Martin, Blanca Lopez, Ivan Vidal, Francisco Valera, and Borja Nogales. 2024. Service for deploying digital twins of qkd networks. Applied Sciences 14, 3 (2024), 1018. [32] Miralem Mehic, Emir Dervisevic, Peppino Fazio, and Miroslav Voznak. 2025. Virtual quantum key distribution network ecosystem: the National Czech QKD Network. IEEE network (2025). [33] Judith Michael, Loek Cleophas, Steffen Zschaler, Tony Clark, Benoit Combe-male, Thomas Godfrey, Djamel Eddine Khelladi, Vinay Kulkarni, Daniel Lehner, Bernhard Rumpe, et al . 2025. Model-driven engineering for digital twins: oppor-tunities and challenges. Systems Engineering 28, 5 (2025), 659–670. [34] Chukwudi Nwogu, Giovanni Lugaresi, Anastasia Anagnostou, Andrea Matta, and Simon JE Taylor. 2022. Towards a requirement-driven digital twin architecture. 

Procedia CIRP 107 (2022), 758–763. [35] Object Management Group. 2025. OMG System Modeling Language (SysML) Specification . Specification. Object Management Group. https://www.omg.org/ spec/SysML/2.0 [36] Object Management Group. 2025. Systems Modeling API and Services Specifi-cation . Specification. Object Management Group. https://www.omg.org/spec/ SystemsModelingAPI/1.0 [37] Momtchil Peev, Christoph Pacher, Romain Alléaume, Claudio Barreiro, Jan Bouda, Winfried Boxleitner, Thierry Debuisschert, Eleni Diamanti, Mehrdad Dianati, James F Dynes, et al . 2009. The SECOQC quantum key distribution network in Vienna. New journal of physics 11, 7 (2009), 075001. [38] Masahide Sasaki, Mikio Fujiwara, H Ishizuka, W Klaus, K Wakui, M Takeoka, S Miki, T Yamashita, Z Wang, A Tanaka, et al . 2011. Field test of quantum key distribution in the Tokyo QKD Network. Optics express 19, 11 (2011), 10387– 10409. [39] Douglas C Schmidt et al . 2006. Model-driven engineering. Computer-IEEE Computer Society- 39, 2 (2006), 25. [40] Manoj Stanley, Y Gui, D Unnikrishnan, SRG Hall, and I Fatadin. 2022. Recent progress in quantum key distribution network deployments and standards. In 

Journal of Physics: Conference Series , Vol. 2416. IOP Publishing, 012001. [41] Rodney Van Meter, Ryosuke Satoh, Naphan Benchasattabuse, Kentaro Teramoto, Takaaki Matsuo, Michal Hajdušek, Takahiko Satoh, Shota Nagayama, and Shigeya Suzuki. 2022. A quantum internet architecture. In 2022 IEEE International Con-ference on Quantum Computing and Engineering (QCE) . IEEE, 341–352. [42] Stephanie Wehner, David Elkouss, and Ronald Hanson. 2018. Quantum internet: A vision for the road ahead. Science 362, 6412 (2018), eaam9288. [43] Ran Wei, Ruizhe Yang, Shijun Liu, Chongsheng Fan, Rong Zhou, Zekun Wu, Haochi Wang, Yifan Cai, and Zhe Jiang. 2024. Towards an extensible model-based digital twin framework for space launch vehicles. Journal of Industrial Information Integration 41 (2024), 100641. [44] Xiaoliang Wu, Alexander Kolar, Joaquin Chung, Dong Jin, Tian Zhong, Rajkumar Kettimuthu, and Martin Suchara. 2021. SeQUeNCe: a customizable discrete-event simulator of quantum networks. Quantum Science & Technology 6, 4 (2021), 045027. [45] R Yang, Rui Wang, MJ Clark, Jianxiong Tan, J Tai, Ronaldo Balram, Shan Jiang, Siddarth Koduru Joshi, and Dimitra Simeonidou. 2025. Demonstration of A Digital Twin for An Entanglement-Based Quantum Network. In 2025 Optical Fiber Communications Conference and Exhibition (OFC) . IEEE, 1–3. [46] Jingxi Zhang, Carsten Ellwein, Malte Heithoff, Judith Michael, and Andreas Wortmann. 2025. Digital twin and the asset administration shell: J. Zhang et al. 

Software and Systems Modeling 24, 3 (2025), 771–793. 10