Title: Predicate Importance Estimation and Decoupled Rationale-Score Distillation for Entity Alignment

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.22992v1

Published Time: Tue, 23 Jun 2026 02:49:00 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
# Predicate Importance Estimation and Decoupled Rationale-Score Distillation for Entity Alignment 

Keunha Kim 1, Yoonjin Jang 1, Hyeon-gu Lee 2, Sihyung Kim 2, Youngjoong Ko 1*1SungKyunKwan University, 2NAVER, 

{keunhakim98, yoonjinjang98}@gmail.com, yjko@skku.edu {hyeongu.lee, sihyung.kim}@navercorp.com 

Abstract 

Knowledge graphs (KGs) are increasingly used as structured context for Large Language Mod-els (LLMs), but industrial KG-RAG systems of-ten need to integrate public and domain-specific KGs constructed from heterogeneous databases. This integration relies on Entity Alignment (EA), where lexical matching alone is insuf-ficient under predicate-name variation and in-complete local neighborhoods. We address EA for KG integration by constructing a pairwise EA dataset and proposing two complemen-tary modules: Predicate Importance Estimation (PIE) and Decoupled Rationale-Score Distil-lation (DRSD). PIE is a compact embedding-based approach that removes the subject infor-mation from each 1-hop triple, encodes the re-sulting subjectless triples, and aggregates them with learnable predicate-importance weights to build predicate-aware entity embeddings. DRSD trains a distilled small language model (SLM) with pseudo-answers produced by a teacher LLM through distinct prompts. By con-verting binary EA labels into text-based super-vision and decoupling confidence-score estima-tion from label-consistent rationales, DRSD en-ables the SLM to learn task-specific reasoning while retaining a less label-biased confidence signal. Experiments show that PIE and DRSD improve EA classification. Moreover, because DRSD decouples confidence-score estimation from the decision, a discrepancy between the two flags an uncertain prediction for human re-view, thereby enabling a practical discrepancy between automatic acceptance and human-in-the-loop verification. 

1 Introduction 

Knowledge graphs (KGs) are increasingly used as structured knowledge sources for Large Language Models (LLMs) (Pan et al., 2024; Sun et al., 2024). Industrial systems simultaneously reason over pub-lic KGs such as DBpedia and Wikidata, as well 

> *Corresponding author

Figure 1: 1-hop graph example for an entity-alignment pair 

as domain-specific KGs that are constructed from multiple internal relational databases via standard mappings (Das et al., 2012; Sequeda and Miranker, 2017). Therefore, these heterogeneous sources need to be integrated into a unified KG. To build such a unified KG, duplicate entities must be iden-tified and merged across sources, which requires an explicit entity-alignment step. Entity Alignment 

(EA) identifies equivalent entities across distinct KGs (Sun et al., 2020b; Zhang et al., 2022). EA is intrinsically hard for two reasons that matter espe-cially when systems bridge different graphs. First, two graphs typically use different predicate-naming conventions (e.g., employer_of vs. worksFor ), so purely structural or string-based matching is mis-led by surface variance. Second, knowledge graphs collected for different purposes often contain dif-ferent types and amounts of information. There-fore, robust EA must go beyond semantic simi-larity through joint modeling of the surrounding subgraph and the relative importance of each pred-icate as evidence for alignment. To handle such complex semantic judgments, Large Language Models (LLMs) offer attractive generalization capabilities, and these capabilities have led recent work to exploit them for EA (Jiang et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024). 1

> arXiv:2606.22992v1 [cs.CL] 22 Jun 2026

However, these LLM-based aligners rely heavily on general pretraining knowledge. As a result, they struggle to internalize the very domain-specific re-lations and user-defined alignment constraints that define these heterogeneous graphs because such domain-specific patterns were under-represented during pretraining. In this work, we address entity alignment for KG integration by constructing a pairwise EA dataset and introducing two complementary alignment modules. Our dataset reflects the pre-alignment setting: each instance contains two ambiguous can-didate entities and their 1-hop subgraph evidence, so the model must decide equivalence using local graph context. 

Our first module, Predicate Importance Esti-mation (PIE), is a compact embedding-based ap-proach that removes the subject information from each 1-hop triple, independently encodes the sub-jectless triples, and aggregates the representations with learnable predicate-importance weights. As a result, PIE constructs a compact subgraph-level entity embedding, estimates which predicates are most useful for EA, and achieves strong entity alignment performance. 

Our second module, Decoupled Rationale-Score Distillation (DRSD) , trains a distilled small language model (SLM) using decoupled rationale-score pseudo-answers produced by an LLM from distinct prompts. Since binary la-bels lack the reasoning and confidence signals needed for text-generating models, DRSD uses task-specific prompts to elicit structured teacher responses and convert EA labels into text-based supervision. When eliciting responses from the teacher LLM through prompts, the gold-label prompt produces a label-consistent decision and rationale, whereas the score prompt asks the LLM to estimate similarity without exposing the gold la-bel or requiring a generated decision. The final SFT target combines the gold-label decision and justi-fication with the score prompt confidence score, allowing the student model to learn task-specific reasoning while retaining a less label-biased confi-dence signal. Compared with the prompt-only LLM baseline, both proposed modules improve EA performance when trained on the constructed dataset. PIE im-proves Acc. and F1 by 6.32 and 4.63 percentage points, and DRSD improves them by 7.66 and 6.76 percentage points. Moreover, because DRSD de-couples the confidence score from the decision, dis-agreements between the two can flag predictions to route to human review (13.3% of pairs), which can further increase F1 from 0.886 to 0.909. 

2 Related Work 

2.1 Entity Alignment and LLM-based Approaches 

Entity Alignment (EA) has been studied through embedding-based and neighborhood-aware meth-ods, including translation-style KG embeddings, cross-graph extensions, and GNN-based aligners (Sun et al., 2020b; Zhang et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2017; Sun et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2018; Wu et al., 2019; Sun et al., 2020a). These methods show that structural, attribute, and predicate-aware features are important for distinguishing equivalent entities across heterogeneous KGs (Trisedya et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2022). More recent LLM-based approaches, such as ChatEA, AutoAlign, and LLM4EA, exploit the semantic rea-soning ability of LLMs for EA (Jiang et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024). However, they can be brittle on domain-specific relations and costly to run for each candidate pair (Ling et al., 2023). Our work complements these lines of re-search by learning predicate-aware entity repre-sentations and distilling LLM alignment reasoning into a smaller model with a score-based confidence signal. 

2.2 Knowledge Distillation from LLMs to Small Models 

Knowledge distillation (Hinton et al., 2015) has recently been extended from logit-matching to ra-tionale transfer. Distilling Step-by-Step (Hsieh et al., 2023) trains a small model jointly on LLM-generated labels and chain-of-thought rationales (Wei et al., 2022) to match teacher performance with far fewer parameters. Subsequent work (Mag-ister et al., 2023; Ho et al., 2023) demonstrates that small models can be taught to reason via CoT distillation, and SCOTT (Wang et al., 2023) intro-duces a counterfactual objective to reduce shortcut imitation. 

2.3 Predicate-Aware KG Embeddings 

Beyond the translation-based and GNN-based methods above, several lines of work explicitly model relation or attribute importance. KBGAT (Nathani et al., 2019) introduces attention-based neighborhood weighting for embeddings; relation-2aware attention is similarly central to MRAEA (Mao et al., 2020) and RDGCN (Wu et al., 2019); and attribute-centric methods such as JAPE (Sun et al., 2017) and AttrE (Trisedya et al., 2019) treat predicates and literal attributes as first-class signals. PIE instead uses subjectless, predicate-aware rep-resentations with importance-weighted pooling to produce a compact entity signature. 

3 Preliminaries 

Let C = {G1, . . . , G M } denote a collection of knowledge graphs (KGs). Each KG is defined as 

Gm = ( Em, Pm, Tm), (1) where Em is the entity set, Pm is the predicate set, and Tm is the triple set of the m-th KG. We assume that entities are unique within each KG, while equivalent entities may appear across differ-ent KGs. Our task is to compare entities from two different KGs, Gm and Gn (m̸ = n), and decide whether they denote the same entity. E.g., e ≡ e′ or e̸ ≡

e′, e ∈ Gm, e ′ ∈ Gn. Each triple is denoted as 

(s, p, o ), where s, p, and o denote subject, predicate, and object, respectively. For an entity e ∈ E m, its outgoing 1-hop neighborhood Nm(e) is 

Nm(e) = {(s, p, o ) ∈ T m | s = e}. (2) For a cross-KG entity pair (e, e ′) ∈ E m × E n, we compute its similarity score se,e ′ as 

se,e ′ = ϕ Nm(e), Nn(e′), (3) where ϕ(·, ·) is an entity-pair scoring function. The final alignment decision bye,e ′ is then 

bye,e ′ =

(

1, if se,e ′ ≥ τ, 

0, otherwise , (4) where τ is a decision threshold, bye,e ′ = 1 indicates 

e ≡ e′, and bye,e ′ = 0 indicates e̸ ≡ e′.Thus the task is to retrieve similar cross-collection candidates and decide match/non-match for integration. 

4 Methodology 

Two complementary components are used for entity alignment. The first one is Predicate Importance Estimation (PIE), a lightweight statistical module that learns which predicates are most informative for entity alignment. The second one is Decoupled Rationale-Score Distillation (DRSD), a reasoning-aware distillation framework that transfers decision patterns from a large teacher model to a smaller student model. 

4.1 Predicate Importance Estimation 

For the 1-hop neighborhood Nm(e) of an entity e,Predicate Importance Estimation (PIE) constructs a representative embedding ve from local rela-tional evidence. It first encodes subjectless triples, then pools triple representations by predicate, and finally aggregates predicate-level representations with predicate-importance weights. This process yields both an entity embedding and predicate-importance weights, and the weights indicate which predicates are most informative for alignment. PIE consists of three stages: (1) subjectless triple encod-ing, (2) predicate-wise pooling, and (3) predicate-importance pooling. 

Subjectless triple encoding. For each outgoing triple (e, p, o ) ∈ N m(e), we remove the subject and encode only the predicate–object text. This re-duces reliance on the surface name of e and makes entity comparison depend more on relational evi-dence: 

h(e) 

> p,o

= Enc  text( p) ⊕ text( o), (5) where ⊕ denotes text concatenation. Let P(e) = 

{p | ∃ o : ( e, p, o ) ∈ N m(e)} be the set of predi-cates around e, and let Op(e) = {o | (e, p, o ) ∈Nm(e)} be the object set for predicate p.

Predicate-wise pooling. Since an entity may have multiple triples with the same predicate, we apply mean pooling over their triple embeddings to obtain one predicate-level representation: 

r(e) 

> p

= 1

|O p(e)|

X

> o∈O p(e)

h(e)

> p,o

. (6) 

Predicate-importance pooling. We then aggre-gate the predicate-level representations into a single entity embedding: 

αp = exp( wp)

P 

> p′∈P (e)

exp( wp′ ) ,

ve = X

> p∈P (e)

αpr(e) 

> p

. (7) Here, wp is a learnable scalar parameter for pred-icate p, and its softmax-normalized value αp rep-resents the relative importance of that predicate within P(e).3Figure 2: Overview of the proposed framework. (Left) Entity embedding construction ( ve) within PIE; embeddings for each entity pair are subsequently concatenated for MLP-based classification. (Right) Illustrative example of the decoupled rationale-score distillation process. 

Entity-pair training. For a candidate pair (e, e ′),we concatenate the two entity embeddings and feed them into an MLP classifier: 

ˆye,e ′ = σ MLP([ ve; ve′ ]) , (8) where σ(·) is the sigmoid function and ˆye,e ′ ∈ [0 , 1] 

denotes the predicted match probability. We train the classifier with binary cross-entropy over entity pairs with labels, where ye,e ′ = 1 indicates that 

e and e′ are equivalent, and ye,e ′ = 0 otherwise. During training, we freeze the pretrained encoder and update only the predicate-importance weights and the MLP classifier layers. This keeps the train-ing overhead low and quickly adapts the predicate-importance weights to the alignment task. 

4.2 Decoupled Rationale-Score Distillation 

Conventional LLM distillation trains students to im-itate teacher outputs, which makes the teacher an implicit performance ceiling when its responses are incorrect. DRSD instead separates pseudo-answer generation into a supervised signal, where the teacher sees the gold label, and an unsupervised sig-nal, where it does not. Combining the two preserves label-guided reasoning while yielding a confidence score that is less tied to the supervised answer. 

Decoupled Rationale-Score Label Construction 

Our goal is to construct pseudo-answers that pre-serve the teacher’s reasoning ability while prevent-ing the confidence score from being biased toward the gold label in the prompt, regardless of the ob-jective similarity between the two entities. For the 

i-th labeled entity pair, let Xi denote the serialized evidence for the two entities and yi its gold label. We use three prompt schemas: 

qgold  

> i

= Prompt gold (Xi, y i),qscore  

> i

= Prompt score (Xi),qsft  

> i

= Prompt sft (Xi).

(9) The gold-label prompt generates a supervised de-cision and rationale, whereas the score prompt es-timates confidence from the evidence without re-ceiving the gold label or producing a decision. The sft prompt is a simplified student training prompt for efficient fine-tuning. The teacher outputs are 

ogold  

> i

= T (qgold  

> i

) =  jgold  

> i

, d gold  

> i

, c gold 

> i

,

oscore  

> i

= T (qscore  

> i

) =  jscore  

> i

, c score 

> i

, (10) where d, c, and j denote the decision, score, and jus-tification fields, respectively. Appendix C provides the prompt templates and representative JSON-style teacher responses. We then compose the final SFT target with the decision and justification from the gold-label out-put and the score from the score prompt output: 

ℓsft  

> i

=  dgold  

> i

, c score  

> i

, j gold 

> i

. (11) These three fields correspond to the final alignment decision, confidence score, and reasoning justifica-tion, respectively. This decoupled rationale-score construction uses label information where it is most reliable—the decision and justification—and keeps confidence estimation independent of the gold la-bel in the prompt. As a result, the score can be used as a more objective thresholding signal for precision–recall trade-offs and human-in-the-loop review. 44.2.1 Predicate-Importance Weights 

The predicate-importance weights learned by PIE are also used to compress LLM inputs. For a budget 

k, we keep only the triples whose predicates fall in the top-k set, 

TopK( α, k ) = arg max   

> S⊆P(e),|S|=k

X

> p∈S

αp, (12) 

˜Nm(e) = {(e, p, o ) ∈ N m(e) | p ∈ TopK( α, k )},

(13) where αp is the predicate-importance weight from Eq. (7). We use k=10 and further retain at most 10 objects per predicate (Appendix B.3), which pre-serves informative evidence while reducing prompt length and inference cost. 

4.2.2 SFT 

We construct an SFT dataset for a smaller language model as prompt–pseudo-answer pairs: 

DSFT = {(qsft  

> i

, ℓ sft  

> i

)}Ni=1 . (14) The student model is fine-tuned to generate the de-coupled rationale-score target response from the sft prompt. In this way, the small language model learns the gold-label decision and justification, and it inherits the prompt-derived score as its confi-dence signal. At deployment time, the generated score can be thresholded to trade precision against recall according to application constraints. To an-alyze the effect of score decoupling, we compare DRSD against Label-Guided Distillation (LGD) ,which is an ablation that uses a single gold-label prompt to jointly produce the decision, rationale, and score without decoupling. 

5 Experiments 

5.1 Datasets & Models Datasets We evaluate our method on a real-world, industrial-scale labeled entity-pair dataset constructed from our in-house heterogeneous knowledge graphs. The dataset contains a total of 85,858 training entity pairs and 5,000 evaluation pairs. Each pair is assigned a binary label: SAME 

for equivalent entities and DIFFERENT for non-equivalent entities. A detailed description of the underlying knowledge graphs and dataset statistics, including 1-hop triple distributions, is provided in Appendix A.                           

> Method Acc. Prec. Rec. F1
> LLM 0.7976 0.7433 0.9092 0.8179 SLM 0.7418 0.7737 0.6836 0.7258 PIE(ours) 0.8608 0.8438 0.8856 0.8642 DRSD(ours) 0.8742 0.8126 0.9728 0.8855 + Human Review 0.9020 0.8463 0.9824 0.9093
> Table 1: Entity alignment performance on the evaluation split. LLM and SLM are prompt-only; DRSD is fine-tuned from the SLM. + Human Review corrects the 13.3% of pairs flagged as score–decision conflicts.

Models For PIE, we use BAAI/bge-m3 1 to generate embeddings and employ a two-layer MLP as the classifier. For DRSD, we use 

openai/gpt-oss-120b 2 as the teacher LLM and train a hcx-srch1-8B (SLM) for distillation. De-tailed architecture and training hyperparameters are provided in Appendix B. 

5.2 Results 

Table 1 reports entity alignment performance on the evaluation split. For DRSD, the model outputs both a decision and a similarity score. we compute the reported metrics from the decision output by treating SAME predictions as the positive label. The results highlight two main findings. First, PIE achieves strong performance despite its com-pact architecture and small number of trainable pa-rameters. This suggests that subjectless triples can be effectively encoded in the semantic embedding space and aggregated with predicate-aware weights to construct discriminative entity representations for classification. Second, the comparison between LLM and DRSD shows that pseudo-answer distillation is effective. The distilled SLM outperforms the prompted LLM and implicitly learns task-specific alignment rules embedded in the data. We note that DRSD inherits a prior distribution biased to-ward SAME due to the imbalanced training split (76.8% SAME ) and thus prioritizes recall, whereas PIE exhibits more balanced performance. Finally, routing DRSD’s uncertain predictions to human review raises F1 from 0.886 to 0.909 (Table 1); we analyze why this is possible in Section 5.3. 

5.3 Analysis Predicate Budget k Table 2 reports prompt-only teacher LLM classification performance as 

> 1https://huggingface.co/BAAI/bge-m3
> 2https://huggingface.co/openai/gpt-oss-120b

5k Acc. Prec. Rec. F1                 

> 50.7956 0.7340 0.9272 0.8194 10 0.7976 0.7433 0.9092 0.8179 15 0.8044 0.7532 0.9056 0.8224 20 0.8094 0.7574 0.9104 0.8269

Table 2: LLM classification results across top k predi-cate budgets. Best scores are shown in bold. 

Figure 3: Predicate-importance weights learned by PIE for predicates in the specific domain (Company). 

the predicate budget k in PIE’s importance-based compression varies (Section 4.2.1). Performance changes only marginally as k grows from 10 to 20, while prompt length increases with k. This indi-cates that the top-ranked predicates already carry most of the alignment-relevant evidence, which serves as the basis for selecting k=10 to minimize the input volume while maintaining accuracy. 

Predicate-importance Weights Figure 3 vi-sualizes the predicate-importance weights that PIE learns in the company domain. The highly weighted predicates correspond to attributes and relations describing organizational identity or busi-ness context, indicating that PIE learns inter-pretable predicate preferences consistent with hu-man judgment, beyond merely improving classifi-cation. 

LGD vs DRSD Figure 4 compares where LGD and DRSD place their errors across score-bins (false negatives at top, false positives at bottom). In LGD, the score is tied to the decision. DIFFERENT 

predictions receive low scores and SAME predic-tions receive high scores, so both false negatives and false positives for this model fall within the ex-pected side of the threshold. As a result, LGD pro-duces almost no score–decision discrepancy, and no signal indicates which predictions are unreli-able. DRSD instead decouples the score from the decision, which can assign high scores to 24 pairs predicted as DIFFERENT and low scores to 115 pairs predicted as SAME .These discrepancies concentrate on the model’s errors, and form a concrete criterion for human-in-the-loop review. Only these conflicting cases (13.3% of the evaluation set) need to be routed to a human annotator. The same review applied to LGD yields almost no change, since it pro-duces no discrepancies to act on. In an industrial KG-integration environment where false-positive merges result in significant costs and review capac-ity is limited, this allows an operator to automati-cally accept confident predictions and focus their review efforts solely on the small set of genuinely uncertain ones that a label-coupled score cannot support.                   

> 00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> Count
> False Negative (FN)
> LGD
> DRSD
> 00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9
> 0
> 100
> 200
> 300
> Count
> False Positive (FP)

Figure 4: Score-bin distribution of false negatives (top) and false positives (bottom). DRSD shows score– decision discrepancies (high-score FN, low-score FP) that can route to human review, whereas LGD produces almost none. 

6 Conclusion 

We presented the entity-alignment framework for heterogeneous KG integration that combines Predi-cate Importance Estimation (PIE) and Decoupled Rationale-Score Distillation (DRSD). PIE learns predicate-aware entity representations from sub-jectless 1-hop triples, while DRSD distills LLM reasoning into a smaller model by decoupling label-consistent rationales from confidence-score estima-tion. Crucially, because DRSD’s score is decoupled from its decision, discrepancies between decision and score detect likely errors and provide a crite-rion for human review that a label-coupled score cannot offer. Correcting only these detected error 6cases further improves F1. These results suggest that efficient and operationally practical EA is fea-sible by selecting task-relevant graph evidence with a predicate-aware method and distilling LLM rea-soning into a compact model. The decoupling prin-ciple is not limited to EA and it can also be useful in other human-in-the-loop distillation settings. 

Limitations 

Our study has several limitations. First, although PIE is designed to learn predicate-importance weights, these weights can become biased when some classes or predicates dominate the train-ing data. Ideally, predicate importance should be estimated in a class-aware manner, but pred-icate distributions also vary across collections. Future work should explore multiple importance weights, ensemble-based weighting, or other de-biasing strategies that produce predicate weights generalizing across both classes and collections. Second, we do not provide a component-level ablation of PIE, such as isolating the contribution of subjectless encoding or comparing learnable im-portance weights against uniform pooling. A finer-grained analysis of these design choices is left to future work. Third, our human-review results assume correct annotator judgment and therefore represent an up-per bound on the achievable gain. In practice, the realized improvement depends on annotator accu-racy and the available review budget, and the 13.3% of pairs flagged for review may be costly to inspect at scale. Estimating the gain under realistic annota-tor behavior is left to future work. 

Ethical Considerations 

Data. Our experiments use proprietary, in-house knowledge graphs constructed from internal databases. The data contains entity records such as organizations, people, and creative works but no private personal information beyond what is publicly associated with these entities. Because the data is proprietary, we do not release it; we instead report dataset statistics and full implementation de-tails (Appendix A) to support reproducibility of the method. 

Human review. The “+ Human Review” row in Table 1 uses the manually verified evaluation la-bels as the outcome of reviewing the flagged score– decision conflicts. Because these labels are human-verified, the result can be interpreted as a simula-tion of correct human review on the flagged subset. We report it separately from fully automatic meth-ods because deployment gains would still depend on annotator accuracy, review capacity, and quality-control procedures. 

Intended use. The proposed method targets knowledge-graph integration in industrial settings. As with any automated alignment system, incorrect merges could propagate errors into downstream applications. The confidence-based routing we pro-pose is designed precisely to mitigate this risk by escalating uncertain cases to human review. 

References       

> Muhao Chen, Yingtao Tian, Mohan Yang, and Carlo Zaniolo. 2017. Multilingual knowledge graph embed-dings for cross-lingual knowledge alignment. In Pro-ceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Con-ference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-17 , pages 1511–1517. Shengyuan Chen, Qinggang Zhang, Junnan Dong, Wen Hua, Qing Li, and Xiao Huang. 2024. Entity align-ment with noisy annotations from large language models. In Advances in Neural Information Process-ing Systems (NeurIPS) .Souripriya Das, Seema Sundara, and Richard Cyganiak. 2012. R2RML: Rdb to rdf mapping language. W3C Recommendation. Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. 2015. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02531 .Namgyu Ho, Laura Schmid, and Se-Young Yun. 2023. Large language models are reasoning teachers. In
> Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 14852–14882, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Cheng-Yu Hsieh, Chun-Liang Li, Chih-kuan Yeh, Hootan Nakhost, Yasuhisa Fujii, Alex Ratner, Ranjay Krishna, Chen-Yu Lee, and Tomas Pfister. 2023. Dis-tilling step-by-step! outperforming larger language models with less training data and smaller model sizes. In Findings of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics: ACL 2023 , pages 8003–8017, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Xuhui Jiang, Yinghan Shen, Zhichao Shi, Chengjin Xu, Wei Li, Zixuan Li, Jian Guo, Huawei Shen, and Yuanzhuo Wang. 2024. Unlocking the power of large language models for entity alignment. In Proceed-ings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Pa-pers) , pages 7566–7583, Bangkok, Thailand. Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics.

7Chen Ling, Xujiang Zhao, Jiaying Lu, Chengyuan Deng, Can Zheng, Junxiang Wang, Tanmoy Chowdhury, Yun Li, Hejie Cui, Tianjiao Zhao, Amit Panalkar, Wei Cheng, Haoyu Wang, Yanchi Liu, Zhengzhang Chen, Haifeng Chen, Chris White, Quanquan Gu, Carl Yang, and Liang Zhao. 2023. Domain special-ization as the key to make large language models disruptive: A comprehensive survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.18703 .Lucie Charlotte Magister, Jonathan Mallinson, Jakub Adamek, Eric Malmi, and Aliaksei Severyn. 2023. Teaching small language models to reason. In Pro-ceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers) , pages 1773–1781, Toronto, Canada. Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics. Xin Mao, Wenting Wang, Huimin Xu, Man Lan, and Yuanbin Wu. 2020. Mraea: An efficient and robust entity alignment approach for cross-lingual knowl-edge graph. In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining , WSDM ’20, page 420–428, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Deepak Nathani, Jatin Chauhan, Charu Sharma, and Manohar Kaul. 2019. Learning attention-based em-beddings for relation prediction in knowledge graphs. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics , pages 4710– 4723, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics. Shirui Pan, Linhao Luo, Yufei Wang, Chen Chen, Ji-apu Wang, and Xindong Wu. 2024. Unifying large language models and knowledge graphs: A roadmap. 

IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engi-neering , 36(7):3580–3599. Juan F. Sequeda and Daniel P. Miranker. 2017. A pay-as-you-go methodology for ontology-based data access. 

IEEE Internet Computing , 21(2):92–96. Jiashuo Sun, Chengjin Xu, Lumingyuan Tang, Saizhuo Wang, Chen Lin, Yeyun Gong, Lionel M. Ni, Heung-Yeung Shum, and Jian Guo. 2024. Think-on-graph: Deep and responsible reasoning of large language model on knowledge graph. In International Confer-ence on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Zequn Sun, Wei Hu, and Chengkai Li. 2017. Cross-lingual entity alignment via joint attribute-preserving embedding. In The Semantic Web – ISWC 2017 ,pages 628–644, Cham. Springer International Pub-lishing. Zequn Sun, Wei Hu, Qingheng Zhang, and Yuzhong Qu. 2018. Bootstrapping entity alignment with knowl-edge graph embedding. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-18 , pages 4396–4402. Interna-tional Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Organization. Zequn Sun, Chengming Wang, Wei Hu, Muhao Chen, Jian Dai, Wei Zhang, and Yuzhong Qu. 2020a. Knowledge graph alignment network with gated multi-hop neighborhood aggregation. In Proceed-ings of AAAI , pages 222–229. Zequn Sun, Qingheng Zhang, Wei Hu, Chengming Wang, Muhao Chen, Farahnaz Akrami, and Chengkai Li. 2020b. A benchmarking study of embedding-based entity alignment for knowledge graphs. Proc. VLDB Endow. , 13(12):2326–2340. Bayu Distiawan Trisedya, Jianzhong Qi, and Rui Zhang. 2019. Entity alignment between knowledge graphs using attribute embeddings. In Proceedings of AAAI ,pages 297–304. Peifeng Wang, Zhengyang Wang, Zheng Li, Yifan Gao, Bing Yin, and Xiang Ren. 2023. SCOTT: Self-consistent chain-of-thought distillation. In Proceed-ings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 5546–5558, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Zhichun Wang, Qingsong Lv, Xiaohan Lan, and Yu Zhang. 2018. Cross-lingual knowledge graph alignment via graph convolutional networks. In Pro-ceedings of EMNLP , pages 349–357. Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, brian ichter, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, and Denny Zhou. 2022. Chain-of-thought prompt-ing elicits reasoning in large language models. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 35, pages 24824–24837. Curran Associates, Inc. Yuting Wu, Xiao Liu, Yansong Feng, Zheng Wang, Rui Yan, and Dongyan Zhao. 2019. Relation-aware en-tity alignment for heterogeneous knowledge graphs. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-19 ,pages 5278–5284. International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Organization. Kun Xu, Liwei Wang, Mo Yu, Yansong Feng, Yan Song, Zhiguo Wang, and Dong Yu. 2019. Cross-lingual knowledge graph alignment via graph matching neu-ral network. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meet-ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,pages 3156–3161, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics. Rui Zhang, Yixin Su, Bayu Distiawan Trisedya, Xi-aoyan Zhao, Min Yang, Hong Cheng, and Jianzhong Qi. 2024. Autoalign: Fully automatic and effective knowledge graph alignment enabled by large lan-guage models. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering , 36(6):2357–2371. Rui Zhang, Bayu Distiawan Trisedya, Miao Li, Yong Jiang, and Jianzhong Qi. 2022. A benchmark and comprehensive survey on knowledge graph entity alignment via representation learning. The VLDB Journal , 31(5):1143–1168. 

8A Data Statistics 

Knowledge Graphs Our entity pairs are drawn from in-house heterogeneous knowledge graphs spanning multiple domains and sources. The graphs encompass entities from diverse domains such as entertainment (films, music, and broadcasts), com-panies, people, and cultural properties, connected through 2,904 distinct relation types. Because the graphs are heterogeneous, entities vary in their types and in the relations connecting them, so the set of 1-hop triples available for an entity differs substantially in both quantity and schema across the dataset. For each entity in a pair, we extract its 1-hop triples as the structural context provided to the model. 

Statistics Table 3 reports the dataset scale, label distribution, and 1-hop triple statistics for the train-ing and evaluation splits. The labeled training split is imbalanced toward SAME pairs, which account for 76.8% of training examples, whereas the eval-uation split is intentionally balanced with a 50/50 label ratio. For the triple statistics, Triples/entity (mean) indicates the average number of 1-hop triples available per entity, while Triples/entity (max) indicates the largest number of 1-hop triples observed in each split.               

> Statistic Train Evaluation
> Entity pairs 85,858 5,000
> SAME 65,984 (76.8%) 2,500 (50.0%)
> DIFFERENT 19,874 (23.2%) 2,500 (50.0%) Unique entities 136,626 9,499 Triples/entity (mean) 26.17 25.0 Triples/entity (max) 4,349 1,811
> Table 3: Dataset statistics for the labeled training and evaluation splits. Triples/entity reports the mean and maximum number of 1-hop triples per entity.

B Implementation Details 

B.1 Decoupled Rationale-Score Distillation 

We fine-tune an hcx-srch1-8B model as the stu-dent SLM using the SFT objective described in the main method, with DeepSpeed ZeRO Stage 2, 

bfloat16 precision, and gradient checkpointing. We train for 1 epoch with AdamW (learning rate 

2 × 10 −5, 100 warmup steps, no weight decay), an effective batch size of 8, and a maximum sequence length of 4096 tokens. We apply completion-only loss masking, discard over-length samples, and use greedy decoding with up to 256 new tokens at in-ference time. During inference, the decision field is used for match classification, and the score field is retained for threshold-based confidence analysis. 

B.2 Predicate Importance Estimation (PIE) 

All predicate–object texts are encoded offline with the BAAI/bge-m3 encoder. For each candidate pair, the resulting entity embeddings are concatenated and passed to a two-layer MLP classifier. The pre-trained encoder is frozen, and only the predicate-importance weights and MLP classifier layers are trained with binary cross-entropy using AdamW (learning rate 1 × 10 −3, 100 warmup steps, no weight decay) for up to 20 epochs; validation accu-racy selects the best checkpoint. 

B.3 Pseudo-Answer Construction 

Each entity’s 1-hop neighborhood is serialized as JSON-style evidence, excluding collection-type objects and retaining at most 10 objects per predicate to control prompt length. For each labeled candidate pair, the teacher LLM (openai/gpt-oss-120b ) is queried with both the gold-label prompt and the score prompt. The final SFT target follows the main decoupled rationale-score construction: the decision and justification are taken from the gold-label output, while the score is taken from the score prompt output. 9C Prompt & Output Examples 

(A) Gold-Label Prompt (GOLD_TEMPLATE) 

You will receive two JSON descriptions, and each description is generated from an entity’s subgraph (attributes and relations). You will ALSO receive the manually verified gold (ground-truth) decision label. Your task is to generate: 1) A well-calibrated similarity score in [0, 1] 2) A high-quality justification that is CONSISTENT with the given decision and the score that you generate This output will be used for knowledge distillation. Your task has TWO phases: 

PHASE 1 (internal reasoning, not fully exposed): 

- Use the entity instance type that the model infers to determine which features are CORE vs. AUXILIARY. - Compare the two entities with type-appropriate core attributes and relations. - Identify matches that provide support, explainable discrepancies, conflicts, and information that is missing. - Choose a similarity score that: - Is consistent with the evidence strength - Respects the decision threshold: - If decision = "SAME", score MUST be ≥ 0.60 - If decision = "DIFFERENT", score MUST be < 0.60 - Construct reasoning that supports BOTH the decision and the chosen score. 

IMPORTANT: 

- You MUST NOT contradict the gold decision that the prompt provides. - The score that you generate MUST be consistent with the decision. - Treat the gold decision as correct, even if the evidence is weak or ambiguous. 

PHASE 2 (final output only): 

- Output ONLY the simplified JSON that the template below defines. - Do NOT include internal reasoning or mention the gold decision explicitly. 

[Entity A Description] 

{A_TEXT} 

[Entity B Description] 

{B_TEXT} 

[Gold Label] 

Decision: {GOLD_DECISION} 

FINAL OUTPUT FORMAT (STRICT): 

Return ONLY valid JSON in the following format, with no additional text. 

{"justification": [ "Brief reason 1 (most important type-specific evidence or explanation)", "Brief reason 2", "Brief reason 3" ], "decision": "{GOLD_DECISION}", "score": 0.0 }

Constraints: 

- The decision MUST exactly match the gold decision that the prompt provides. - The score MUST be a float in [0, 1] with at most two decimal places. - Score constraints: - If decision = "SAME" → score ≥ 0.60 - If decision = "DIFFERENT" → score < 0.60 - Justifications must be: - Type-appropriate - Consistent with both the decision and the score magnitude - Do NOT add or remove fields. 

Figure 5: Gold-label prompt used to generate a label-consistent decision and justification for distillation. 

10 (B) Score Prompt (SCORE_TEMPLATE) 

You will receive two JSON descriptions, and each description is generated from an entity’s subgraph (attributes and relations). Your task has TWO phases: 

PHASE 1 (internal reasoning, not fully exposed): 

- Compare the two entities with the most type-appropriate core attributes and relations. - Identify high-confidence matches, matches that provide support, conflicts (high/medium/low), and information that is missing or uncertain. - conflicts should be weighted by their importance to the entity type. - Apply the scoring principles below to compute a similarity score between 0 and 1. 

PHASE 2 (final output only): 

- Output ONLY the simplified JSON that the template below defines. - Do NOT include the full internal analysis in the final answer. - Unique identifiers > entity type > type-specific core attributes > key relations > auxiliary attributes. - Type mismatch or unique ID conflicts should strongly reduce the score. - Missing information increases uncertainty but is not a conflict. 

[Entity A Description] 

{A_TEXT} 

[Entity B Description] 

{B_TEXT} 

FINAL OUTPUT FORMAT (STRICT): 

Return ONLY valid JSON in the following format, with no additional text. 

{"justification": [ "Brief reason 1 (most important type-specific evidence or conflict)", "Brief reason 2", "Brief reason 3" ], "score": 0.0 }

Constraints: 

- The score must be a float in [0, 1] with at most two decimal places. - Justification items must reflect features that are appropriate for the entity type that the model infers. 

Figure 6: Score prompt used to estimate an evidence-based similarity score for an entity pair. 

(C) SFT Prompt (SFT_TEMPLATE) 

You will receive two JSON descriptions, and each description is generated from an entity’s subgraph (attributes and relations). Determine whether the two entities refer to the SAME entity or DIFFERENT entities. 

[Entity A Description] 

{A_TEXT} 

[Entity B Description] 

{B_TEXT} 

Output: 

- decision: SAME or DIFFERENT - score: a similarity score in [0, 1] - three brief justification points Return only valid JSON in the specified format. 

Figure 7: SFT prompt used as the student-model input at training and inference time. 

11 (A) Gold-Label Output (JSON) 

{"justification": [ "Both entities share the title \"Memories\" but have different release years (2023 vs 2019).", "The listed composers and performers differ completely (J.Fla and multiple Western composers vs Maroon 5 and Korean-named composers).", "Additional metadata such as record label, language, and related works are unrelated. This indicates that they are distinct musical works." ], "decision": "DIFFERENT", "score": 0.22 }

Figure 8: Example gold-label prompt output containing a decision, score, and justification. 

(B) Score Prompt Output (JSON) 

{"justification": [ "Both entities share the exact name \"Memories\" and overlapping core composers (Adam Levine and Jonathan/Jon Bellion). This indicates the same musical work.", "Entity A is a 2023 cover by J.Fla, whereas Entity B is the original 2019 recording by Maroon 5; the performer and release-date differences reflect different recordings, not a conflict on composition identity.", "Other attributes (record label, part_of album, instance_of) differ but are performance-specific and do not outweigh the strong composer and title match." ], "score": 0.78 }

Figure 9: Example score prompt output containing an evidence-based score and justification. 

(C) SFT Target (JSON) 

{"justification": [ "Both entities share the title \"Memories\" but have different release years (2023 vs 2019).", "The listed composers and performers differ completely (J.Fla and multiple Western composers vs Maroon 5 and Korean-named composers).", "Additional metadata such as record label, language, and related works are unrelated. This indicates that they are distinct musical works." ], "decision": "DIFFERENT", "score": 0.78 }

Figure 10: Example SFT target combining the gold-label decision and justification with the score prompt score. 

12