Title: Digital Twin Modeling of a Highly Automated Agricultural Tractor

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.19912v1

Published Time: Thu, 23 Jul 2026 00:37:31 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# Digital Twin Modeling of a Highly Automated Agricultural Tractor 

Clay Hallman 1 , Lukas Pindl 1 , Timo Oksanen 11 Technical University of Munich, Germany; Professorship of Agrimechatronics; Munich Institute of Robotics and Machine Intelligence (MIRMI) 

Abstract: In efforts to increase research efficiency and availability, a digital twin of our research tractor (AMX G-trac) is created, focusing especially on the CAN communication for data reading and actuation command following the ISOBUS protocol. Mevea Simulation Software is utilized as the foundation, providing the kinematic model and visuals, while Python is used to read and write CAN messages over a Kvaser CanKing virtual CAN channel. Various performance tests involving straight line and turning behavior are performed in both the digital twin simulation and in the real world to measure similarity. Results indicate that the Mevea model behaves very comparable in its lateral dynamics, often within 5-10 percent, but requires better data to fully capture the longitudinal aspects like acceleration. The final model described in this paper sets the table for a second iteration to include more tractor functions such as hydraulics and tractor-implement dynamics. 

Keywords: Digital Twin, Agricultural Tractor, Kinematics, CAN Communication 1. INTRODUCTION In the automotive and aerospace sectors, digital twins have already been established as a necessary part of develop-ment. While some work has been conducted [1], much less researched is the topic of digital twins for agricultural tractors [2]. While tractor manufacturers make up a much smaller portion of vehicle OEMs than passenger car brands, both in quantity and revenue, the realizable benefits from digital twin-based innovations for tractors should not be underes-timated. By improving system models of tractors through digital twin processes e.g. what-if scenarios, only then can the correct design decisions be made [3–5]. Our research tractor called AMX G-trac is a platform for studying subsystems of autonomy and future functions of agricultural tractor (see Figure 1). The tractor is based on Lindner Lintrac 130. Some examples of applied research on this tractor include tasks such as coverage path planning and other autonomous driving modules, as well as this re-search into digital twins for tractors. By looking into this topic, research can become more efficient. The access to a real-world accurate simulation provides the ability to pre-test con-cepts indoors, removing dependencies on space, weather or general access to the tractor. Furthermore, potentially dangerous questions involving actuation for example can first be investigated and improved before applying approaches to the real-world tractor, where safety and costs are highly relevant. 2. STATE OF THE ART There is a plethora of modern solutions to create a digi-tal twin. Companies like Siemens and Ansys offer powerful programs but with specialties that lie outside of this project. Specifically, agricultural tractors depend more on fuel usage, 

Fig. 1. AMX G-trac research tractor maintenance and downtime costs than crash safety for ex-ample in passenger vehicles [6]. For the task of developing a physically accurate multi-body dynamic simulation with spe-cial consideration of heavy machinery and soil mechanics, the Mevea Simulator software is currently a state-of-the-art solution. Mevea offers the most advanced physics engine available alongside real-time simulation [7]. Most of their technology is tailored towards port, construction or mining equipment, often with the end goal of operator training in mind. Although there have been a few others to consider Mevea for agricultural tractors [8] or other industrial equip-ment [9, 10], it is still a very much untapped opportunity. Mevea’s expertise in off-road machinery makes it a perfect fit when trying to accurately incorporate all the real-world physical considerations into a digital twin. Outside of its dy-namic modeling capabilities, it also specializes in hydraulic arXiv:2607.19912v1 [cs.OH] 22 Jul 2026 Hallman C., Pindl L., Oksanen T. Digital Twin Modeling of a Highly Automated Agricultural Tractor 22 July 2026 

simulation, which is responsible for many functions within the tractor. Albeit outside the scope of this project, tractor-implement interaction could therefore be accurately investi-gated, as well as brake functionality. Mevea also has several different options for CAN network communication. PCAN compatibility allows for semi-direct plug and play assuming physical CAN channels are available. If virtual CAN channels are used (as in this case), Mevea also offers simple ways to extract the component data in real time, thanks to its Python environment. 3. MATERIALS As briefly mentioned earlier, the focus points for this project are primarily the basic kinematic functions of the tractor, and the ability to simulate CAN message-controlled actuation to investigate the vehicle’s reactionary behavior. 

3.1 Software 

Seeing that a digital twin is a software-heavy undertaking, the majority of materials that were needed to complete this research also lie in various software applications. First, the backbone of this topic, where the digital twin lives and exists is the Mevea Simulation Software. Here, the full physical model is built and the multibody dynamic simulation runs in real time. Here, all aspects of the tractor’s kinematics can be considered, such as driving, steering, suspension or the tire-soil interaction. Tractor implement dynamics can also be included but were left out in this project. Plus, Mevea has the capability to control simulation inputs via Python script, which allows for a fully virtual CAN based communication for actuation. Kvaser CanKing is used to set up the virtual CAN channel on which messages are both sent and received, while various Python scripts control the reading and writing of the CAN messages. To create a visually accurate tractor body, Giants Editor was utilized to import the Farming Simulator 2025 Lintrac130 model into Blender. There the model can be exported to a suitable file format for SolidWorks. This gives the possibility of finding rough inertia tensors and component masses as starting points for stabilizing the kinematic performance of the tractor. Here, the axle and body coordinate systems can also be defined to provide simple graphical importing into Mevea. 

3.2 Hardware 

As the name implies, a digital twin involves a physical vehicle as well. In this case, the physical appearance of the AMX G-trac is mostly following original Lindner Lintrac 130 tractor (see Figure 1). This 136 hp diesel engine tractor includes four-wheel steering capabilities and a power-split CVT trans-mission. The AMX G-trac has been further modified to allow for individual control over each axle, enabling the classic tight turning but also crab-steering. 4. METHODS 

4.1 Modeling 

The modeling process is split into two different sections - the physical multi-body dynamics modeling and the necessary steps required to provide a graphical representation. 

Fig. 2. Farming Simulator 25 Tractor Model in SolidWorks Much of the heavy lifting for the actual kinematic model was done by getting the necessary parameters. This was accomplished through a few different methods. First, total weight, tire sizes and weights and drivetrain values were taken from the relevant manufacturers’ specification sheets. For the kinematic model however, one total weight is not sufficient, as each kinematically responsible body needs to be individually defined. This means the front and rear axles, and the remaining bodies (grouped into one cab) each need their own weights, inertia tensors and relevant distances between one another. For this purpose, the openly available 3D model from Farming Simulator 25 was used (Figure 2). By exporting this model into CAD software (in this case SolidWorks), the relevant distances between the necessary body coordinate systems can immediately be measured (making sure to cross-reference some basic CAD model measurements with the real tractor for verification). This is of course also possible to do on the AMX G-Trac itself, however the CAD software allows for much easier access to components in the mid-section of the tractor. Since weights and inertia tensors for each individual body are not provided by manufacturers, the surface mesh from the Farming Simu-lator 25 export was then split into the relevant bodies. For the front and rear axle, assumptions were then made as to material and part density based on common axle weight values. Finally, using the Mass Properties tool in SolidWorks, the axle weights and inertia tensors could be estimated. The imported mesh body of the tractor meant that there were thousands of surfaces just for the cab. Mainly due to time and compute constraints, a simplified model of the tractor cab was created from scratch in SolidWorks. Taking the measured total weight of the tractor and subtracting the axle weights from the mass properties tool, a tractor body weight, comprising of the cab, transmission, engine and other attached components can be found. Then, based on moment equilibrium around the tire contact points, the length wise COG position for the whole tractor (with axles) can be calculated. For implementation into Mevea, the important steps to take care of when inserting the values into the relative body fields are then to select from which body each is referred to, and the location of the coordinate system for that body relative to its reference body. An example is shown in Figure 3. Typically, only one axle needs to be given a coordinate sys-tem in order to be controlled for steering. However, a unique   

> Technical University of Munich Professorship of Agrimechatronics 2ISBN:978-3-911430-17-3 Hallman C., Pindl L., Oksanen T. Digital Twin Modeling of a Highly Automated Agricultural Tractor 22 July 2026

Fig. 3. Creation of Kinematic Chain feature of the research tractor (AMX G-trac) is its dual axle steering. Due to this fact, each axle needs to be modeled individually in order to allow for independent steering. To accomplish dual axle steering, a couple of different options are available. A detailed modeling of the steering geometries and knuckles is possible, but for simplicity, it was decided to rather model the axles as rotating themselves with a steering input and relate the axle bodies to the tractor body using re-alistic constraints like revolute joints at the axle-tractor body mounting points. This works kinematically but could lead to unrealistic visualizations. The solution to this is presented in the next section. Constraints are what allow the different bodies to realistically move in relation to one another. In the context of constraints, apart from the two revolute joints at the axle connections, the only other necessary piece is to constrain the rear axle to the ground. This then enables the realistic motion of the vehicle across the surface without modeling suspension, and all other bodies move through the defined joints relative to its previous body in the kinematic chain. Suspension can also be modeled as a revolute joint around the longitudinal axis rather than the vertical axis, but when coupled with steering a new joint type must be defined to allow for both directions of rotation. For tire modeling, the LuGre method is applied, requiring lateral and longitudinal friction values for the tires as well as spring and damping constants. These values are taken to be the same as the Mevea default model values. A tire spline (Figure 4) is also given to create the shape of the tires through its radius and various coordinates. 

Fig. 4. Tire Spline Values. [11] 

Fig. 5. Mevea Model with all Coordinate Systems. The final model with all its various coordinate systems then looks like that in Figure 5 

4.2 Visualization 

While the model in Mevea will run smoothly without any visual bodies, it is often more helpful and intuitive to include a 3D representation rather than solely relying on graphs and numeric outputs. In Mevea this is accomplished by assigning 3D files such as .3ds or .stl to the corresponding kinematic body. The graphics will in no way affect the dynamic simula-tion but will simply provide visual feedback as to the simula-tion’s behavior. The graphics used in this project are the full tractor and the tires. Due to the way in which the steering is implemented (explained in the previous section), if the axles were to be their own graphic bodies, they would simply just turn underneath the tractor body. However, by giving the full tractor 3D model to the tractor body graphic, only the tires will turn when steering, providing a much more realistic visualization while still allowing for a reasonable steering mechanic. The environment in which the tractor drives has already been provided from Mevea standard models. 

4.3 CAN bus and communication with Mevea simulation 

To set up the virtual CAN bus, both Python and Kvaser CanKing were utilized. Kvaser CanKing was responsible for setting up the virtual CAN channel which allows data to be sent as defined in the CAN network protocol i.e. a specific baud rate and messages consisting of various bytes for IDs and message data etc. It can also be used for bus traffic monitoring. Sending messages on this virtual channel was done via the proprietary library for CAN communication. The CAN library serves as the foundation for sending and re-ceiving CAN messages, while the custom library processes incoming messages and formats outgoing messages ac-cording to predefined message handlers. While Mevea offers various ways to connect CAN channels to the simulation, for a fully virtual channel, a simple way was to communicate through text files. Mevea does support PCAN networking for example, and other predefined data transfer methods with the help of its Nets Configuration Tool, however a professional version of PCAN is needed to create a virtual bus, and due to the specific license, this tool was unavailable. Within a Mevea Python script, any desired variables can be written to a text file. Each file then stores the float value of its respective simulation variable,   

> Technical University of Munich Professorship of Agrimechatronics 3ISBN:978-3-911430-17-3 Hallman C., Pindl L., Oksanen T. Digital Twin Modeling of a Highly Automated Agricultural Tractor 22 July 2026

where it can be read by the first CAN Python script running outside of the simulation. This script then writes the CAN message onto the virtual channel where it can be read by another external script for purposes of data recording and visualization. Through one final Python script, desired actuation inputs can then be specified over CAN, simulating the real-world process of autonomous control. Here, text files also have the advantage that while testing the Mevea model, values can just be quickly updated by modifying the text file directly rather than doing it all through CAN. Finally, when the CAN message is recognized as a command, it writes that value to an input text file which is then read by the input script running each actuator in Mevea. A full example flow overview of simulation data with command injections is provided (Figure 6). 

Fig. 6. Data Flowchart 5. RESULTS For the results of the turn tests, Table 1 shows the relative averages and percent difference between the average values of each test’s set target steering angle values over the time window. Despite there being a slight buffer area of 1 degree in the steering angle controller implemented in Python, while observing the simulation runs in real time, it becomes apparent that the majority of the errors in the steering axles from the simulation actually stems from the data transfer process and not the physics itself. Although the axle behaves stable within the Mevea simulation, the solver timesteps seemed to be too quick for the text file method of data transfer to always complete the full steering angle calculations correctly, leading to the spikes seen in the charts of the non-crab steering tests (Figure A.1). This is further supported by the front axle spikes only occurring once the full turn is made, where large angle values get reset to small ones. It should be noted that the time scales are different due to tractor speeds as well as processing power of the computer running the simulation, however each tractor made roughly two complete turns. Further evidence of this being caused by processing speeds is the fact that the turning behavior of both the real tractor and the twin are the same. That is to say, these spikes do not actually show up in the heading data, because as mentioned before, the simulation runs smoothly and the steering angles are calculated subsequently. The curves in Figure A.2 have been shifted and time scaled to be able to view each individually, as the focus is on the similar behavior and the CAN data recording, rather than the speed in which the tractors turn. 

Fig. 7. Crab Steering Tractor Heading over Time 

Fig. 8. Minimum Turn Radius For the crab steering (10/10) turning test, most of the noise came from the front axle of the real-world tractor, although it is still well within an acceptable range. The heading of the tractor was in fact more stable in the simulation (see Figure 7). Most likely this is due to testing condition differences such as terrain and slip values as well as the real world tractor having covered more distance in its test than the digital twin. The last test to evaluate the steering modeling was the minimum turn radius. Thus the test was carried out with these values. Data from the recorded CAN GNSS messages containing latitude and longitude were then transformed back into a cartesian x,y system for plotting (Figure 8). The Mevea simulation yielded a minimum turn radius of less than 6 meters. This is roughly a meter less than what is reported in standard tractor’s specification sheet. During the simulation, it was clearly seen that the front wheels had a good amount of slip, correctly so, given the terrain they were on. Adversely, for a specification sheet, the turn radius would have been provided for as little of slip as possible, thus explaining this discrepancy.   

> Technical University of Munich Professorship of Agrimechatronics 4ISBN:978-3-911430-17-3 Hallman C., Pindl L., Oksanen T. Digital Twin Modeling of a Highly Automated Agricultural Tractor 22 July 2026

Table 1. Turn Test Results                                

> Test Mean True Front Axle Steering Angle (°) Mean Sim Front Axle Steering Angle (°) % Difference Front Axle Mean True Rear Axle Steering Angle (°) Mean Sim Rear Axle Steering Angle (°) % Difference Rear Axle Turn Test 10/10 10.77 10.87 0.95 9.92 10.86 9.5 Turn Test 20/0 19.65 20.25 3.08 0.183 0.181 1.5 Turn Test 35/0 32.48 35.97 10.74 0.15 0.38 160 Turn Test 20/-6 19.92 20.23 1.57 -5.76 -4.06 29 Turn Test 35/-12 32.30 35.87 11.00 -11.82 -8.00 36.65

Fig. 9. Engine Speed while Accelerating 

Fig. 10. Wheel Speed while Accelerating As the acceleration test does not contain any ’set’ inputs to try and hold still, percent error over time here does not provide much information. Rather, simply viewing the tractor engine (Figure 9) and wheel speeds (Figure 10) during the acceleration phases allow for much more insightful take-aways. From these results, a couple of main ideas become clear. First, the difference between the true power-split hydrostatic CVT transmission and the simple simulated step transmis-sion displays how much more efficient and effective the CVT is in accelerating by keeping the rotational speed of the engine at its maximum torque range. Secondly, the lack of available true mass and inertia data coupled with the un-known CVT parameters play a crucial role in defining the tractor’s agility, as one would expect. Of course, other factors like ground friction values or tire pressure also contribute to these differences, but they are much less impactful than what is shown here. 6. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS Regarding the vehicle dynamics, it can be concluded that the steering mechanism of the digital twin functions well. There are, however, several changes that need to be made to the powertrain, should the necessary data become available. As for the CAN implementation, the same code that is used to communicate within the real tractor has been applied to the digital twin. Thus, while the data flow is slightly altered due to the text files, the human interaction with the communication network remains very similar. There are, however, no orga-nizational processes such as the source address claiming procedure of true CAN ISOBUS communication networks because there are no different devices, just data flowing. This project has provided a clear look into what tools are available for digital twin modeling across all tasks. The ex-porting of 3D Farming Simulator 25 files makes it easy to have the exact tractor in the simulation and several key data fields such as the engine torque curve, weights, steering limitations or tire sizes are all quickly available from the trac-tor specification sheet. However, more detailed parameters like inertia tensors for each body, transmission values or tire frictions require significantly more effort. Mevea’s front loader tutorial is therefore a very helpful tool in starting to find ballpark values for some of these parameters. With the transition of more new tractor transmissions to power split CVTs, a simpler process for defining such in Mevea would be a valuable addition to the software. Additionally, while power-split CVT models already publicly exist, for example in MATLAB, the problem remains that parameters specific to this transmission are not fully available. Ultimately, the goal of creating an initial digital twin model of an agricultural tractor with a focus on CAN communication was achievable with the Mevea Simulation Software. Basic research questions can now be addressed from any location in any condition and the foundation for an improved digital twin has been laid. As sensible next steps to this project, several topics present themselves. First, for researchers looking to improve on this model, the biggest gain certainly appears to be in the drivetrain and inertia values for the bodies. Without having the right drivetrain implementation, the calculated rough inertia tensors did not allow for stable testing. Similarly, assumptions such as solid bodies or semi-solid for axles had to be made to get the mass properties in SolidWorks as exact mechanic model was not available. If the true body   

> Technical University of Munich Professorship of Agrimechatronics 5ISBN:978-3-911430-17-3 Hallman C., Pindl L., Oksanen T. Digital Twin Modeling of a Highly Automated Agricultural Tractor 22 July 2026

properties can be found, this could provide a much more stable starting point for transmission creation and testing. As mentioned early in the text, further consideration of Mevea’s compatibility with MATLAB Simulink can also provide for various strategies to tackle the drivetrain. On the CAN communication side, solutions to either de-crease bus load or perhaps add capacity will help. Alter-natively, other options besides text files can be investigated if cheaper virtual CAN channel solutions become available directly within Mevea similar to PCAN. If instead, the focus is on adding new features to the model, Mevea’s capabilities in adding various sensors such as Lidar or including hydraulic functionalities is certainly interesting. Including a PTO to run implements would also be valuable to investigate dynamic behavior between the implement and tractor. However, this of course requires the modeling of an implement as well. For purely visual improvements, manually changing the color of the various bodies in Blender will also give a quick boost to the simulation experience. Finally, Mevea offers a wide range of output data, so other applications where a digital twin could be helpful are likely possible with their simulation software as well. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We thank Mevea Oy and their employees for their support during this project. We thank Michael Maier for his help in performing the field tests with the real tractor. REFERENCES [1] F. F. Foldager, C. Thule, O. Balling, and P. Larsen, “To-wards a digital twin – modelling an agricultural vehicle,” in Lecture Notes in Computer Science . Springer, 2021, pp. 109–123. [2] W. Purcell and T. Neubauer, “Digital twins in agricul-ture: A state-of-the-art review,” Smart Agricultural Tech-nology , vol. 3, p. 100094, Feb. 2023. [3] A. A. Zhizdyuk, V. N. Builov, S. V. Chumakova, and M. N. Akhilbekov, “Application of digital twins of agricultural machinery for operation and maintenance,” Technical Physics Letters , vol. 51, no. 9, pp. 400–403, Sep. 2025. [4] R. Söderberg, K. Wärmefjord, J. S. Carlson, and L. Lind-kvist, “Toward a digital twin for real-time geometry assur-ance in individualized production,” CIRP Annals , vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 137–140, 2017. [5] D. Piromalis and A. Kantaros, “Digital twins in the auto-motive industry: The road toward physical-digital conver-gence,” Applied System Innovation , vol. 5, no. 4, p. 65, Jul. 2022. [6] J. Liu, Y. Dong, Y. Liu, P. Li, S. Liu, and T. Wang, “Pre-diction study of the heavy vehicle driving state based on digital twin model,” in 2021 IEEE International Con-ference on Power Electronics, Computer Applications (ICPECA) , 2021, pp. 789–797. [7] -, “Digital twins & simulation solutions for ports, con-struction & mining,” https://mevea.com/, Feb. 2026, ac-cessed: 2026-03-31. [8] S. Jaiswal and K. Kerkkänen, “Modeling configurator for real-time simulator of a tractor,” Master’s thesis, Lappeenranta–Lahti University of Technology (LUT Uni-versity), 2026, master’s Thesis. [9] N. Panwar, “Development of a simulation model of a semi-autonomous electric excavator,” Master’s thesis, Lappeenranta–Lahti University of Technology (LUT Uni-versity), 2024. [10] S. Pyne, “Model-based digital twin of a heavy duty machinery,” Master’s thesis, Aalto University, 2021. [11] -, Mevea Modeller: Beginner Tutorials (Mevea Simula-tion Solutions Manuals) , 2026.  

> Technical University of Munich Professorship of Agrimechatronics 6ISBN:978-3-911430-17-3

Hallman C., Pindl L., Oksanen T. Digital Twin Modeling of a Highly Automated Agricultural Tractor 22 July 2026 

Appendix A. ADDITIONAL FIGURES 

(a) (b) 

(c) (d) 

Fig. A.1. Turning Steering Angles Over Testing Window 

Technical University of Munich Professorship of Agrimechatronics 7 ISBN:978-3-911430-17-3 Hallman C., Pindl L., Oksanen T. Digital Twin Modeling of a Highly Automated Agricultural Tractor 22 July 2026 

(a) (b) 

(c) (d) 

Fig. A.2. Heading Values while Turning 

Technical University of Munich Professorship of Agrimechatronics 8 ISBN:978-3-911430-17-3